"Unicorn, the electric scooter startup from the co-creator of gadget tracker Tile, is shutting down operations after blowing all its cash on Facebook and Google ads but only receiving 350 orders for its glossy white e-scooters, it claims. In an email to customers, the company says it lacks the resources to deliver any of its $699 two-wheelers, and won’t be issuing refunds “as we are completely out of funding.”
In a remorseful email, Unicorn CEO Nick Evans said the company had “totally failed as a business” and has also “spread the cost of this failure to you, the early customers that believed in us.”"
new crop of scooter startups hoping to capitalize on the popularity of dockless rental services like Bird and Lime, while also pitching itself as an affordable alternative to shared scooters. In addition to having a striking profile — the all-white look was really something — the scooter was loaded with a lot of high-tech bells and whistles, like GPS tracking and smartphone-enabled locking. Naturally it included integration with Tile, Evans’ other company, which uses Bluetooth to track lost items, like a wallet, keys, or phone.
But now Unicorn is no more. The company claims it sunk all its money into advertising and marketing, as well as loan repayments and other expenses, with little leftover for production and deliveries. Evans wrote:
We could have continued moving forward and taking more orders and that would continue to fund the business, and if we did that might have been able to deliver the product, but we also may have not been able to sell enough Unicorns, so by doing that we would be risking more people’s orders. So we made the very, very difficult decision to stop.
A large portion of the revenue went toward paying for Facebook ads to bring traffic to the site. A portion also went to our manufacturer in the form of a down payment to build the scooters, but unfortunately that down payment cannot be redeemed for a portion of the scooters that we were planning to order.
Unfortunately, the cost of the ads were just too expensive to build a sustainable business. And as the weather continued to get colder throughout the US and more scooters from other companies came on to the market, it became harder and harder to sell Unicorns, leading to a higher cost for ads and fewer customers.
The company is working on selling its remaining assets in order to give partial refunds, but Evans warns that even this is “looking unlikely.”
“We are so, so very sorry,” he concludes.
Customers, as you can imagine, are pissed. “I am upset he basically robbed everyone of his customers and is closing without delivering any scooters,” Rebecca Buchholtz wrote in an email to The Verge. “This was my daughters Christmas gift and now I cannot get her any gift.”
“I find it shocking that someone like Nick Evans who has name recognition and clout in the tech community due to Tile, would operate in such a fraudulent way,” wrote Matt Furhman. Another customer, who said he is now out $998 after ordering two Unicorn scooters, called Evans “a thief.”
Customers are advised to contact their credit card companies and dispute the charges from Unicorn.
In an email to The Verge, Evans said the company had received only around 350 orders. “I feel horribly guilty that we left people with no scooters and no refunds,” he said. “We are working on something, but, yes, this seems unlikely.”
Unicorn isn’t the only electric mobility startup to fall on hard times. Inboard Technology, an electric skateboard startup from Santa Cruz, California, is currently liquidating its intellectual property and assets after attempting to pivot to electric scooters. All 24 employees have been laid off.
Other startups appear to have found some success through a more old-fashioned method of marketing: celebrity endorsements. Unagi’s e-scooter apparently is a hit with musicians like Kendrick Lamar, Chance the Rapper, Halsey, Steve Aoki and teen pop megastar Billie Eilish — which has helped it raise $3.5 million in venture capital.
The scooter boom has been uneven for many startups. Big companies like Bird and Lime were able to stay afloat despite an unprofitable business model thanks to large infusions of capital from investors. But terrible unit economics, and the seasonal nature of the business, has made it difficult for smaller startups to gain a foothold. Companies like Unicorn, which sought to partner with China’s Segway/Ninebot on manufacturing (and whose Segway ES2 the scooter closely resembles), find themselves facing enormous upfront costs that are difficult to recoup without a swell of customer preorders.
It’s also an example of how difficult it is for scooter companies who just take Chinese-made vehicles, paint them and give them a new badge, and some fancier add-ons, and then try to sell it in the US at a markup.

Elon Musk’s tweets calling caver Vernon Unsworth, who was involved in the rescue of 13 people from a cave in Thailand, a “pedo guy” do not meet the legal standard for defamation, a jury found Friday afternoon. As a result, Musk will not be liable for damages.
The decision had to do with defamation law as the judge had laid it out. There were five points: first, that the statements had to be made to a person other than Unsworth; second, that the statements had to be understood to be about Unsworth; third, that the statements had to be understood to mean Unsworth was a pedophile; fourth, that the statements were false; and fifth, that the statements were reckless. “As soon as we got to point two, which was about being acquainted [with Unsworth], we decided,” Carl Shusterman, one of the eight members of the jury, told Buzzfeed News. “The people that read Musk’s tweet wouldn’t have known who he was talking about.”
Leaving the courtroom, Musk told reporters, “my faith in humanity is restored.” His attorney, Alex Spiro, said, “The jury did the right thing.”
Both Musk and Unsworth were present for the closing remarks. Musk appeared unhappy during the plaintiff’s closing remarks. Unsworth, whose back was to the jury, at times looked to be wiping tears from his eyes as Spiro spoke.
In closing remarks, Unsworth’s attorney, L. Lin Wood, characterized one of Musk’s tweets as “sue or true.” Wood said he believed Musk got involved in the Thai cave rescue as a publicity stunt. “I believe Elon Musk saw an opportunity to capitalize on the attention,” Wood said in his closing statement. Wood said that Musk’s tweets “dropped a bomb” on Unsworth, a nuclear bomb that would have radiation that might affect Unsworth for the rest of his life. Wood asked for $5 million in actual damages, $35 million in assumed damages and $150 million in punitive damages, which he characterized as a “hard slap on the wrist.”
In remarks to the press after the verdict, Wood said that the challenge from Musk was not to win the suit but merely to sue. “It’s not often that David beats Goliath,” Wood said outside the court building. Unsworth said he would “take it on the chin.”
With respect to Unsworth’s reputation, Wood said, “Anyone who knows Vernon Unsworth never believed the vile accusations of the billionaire bully.” The concern in the case was other people who might not know Unsworth — and potentially believe Musk, Wood said.
“IT’S NOT OFTEN THAT DAVID BEATS GOLIATH.”
Since Tuesday, the Los Angeles court has heard testimony from Unsworth, Musk, and others about the tweets. Musk has maintained that he viewed his tweets as insults, which are not defamation; on Tuesday, he testified that Twitter is “where people engage in verbal combat.” Unsworth said on Wednesday that he viewed the tweets as accusations, and he felt “dirtied” by them.
After a Thai soccer team and their coach were trapped in a cave system in July 2018, Unsworth — who had the best knowledge of the cave, rescuer Rick Stanton testified on Wednesday — assisted in rescue efforts. Musk had also built a “minisub,” which could be used as a plan B for rescuing the boys — in case the plan to drug the boys and swim them out using divers, which was ultimately successful, didn’t work out. In an interview with CNN, Unsworth said he viewed Musk’s involvement as a “PR stunt” with “absolutely no chance of working,” and that Musk could “stick his sub where it hurts.”
Musk watched the clip “two or three times,” he testified, before sending out the tweets in question. Musk testified that he didn’t know about Unsworth’s involvement in the rescue, assuming he was just some “ex-pat” living in Thailand. In his first tweet, he called Unsworth “sus.” In his last, he wrote “sorry pedo guy, you really did ask for it.” The tweets were “obviously a very off-the-cuff response,” and Musk deleted them and apologized for them.
Spiro reiterated in his closing remarks that the tweets were insults. Federal courts aren’t for people who insult each other, Spiro said. He also repeatedly asked about the whereabouts of Unsworth’s companion, a woman named Tik, who could have spoken to Unsworth’s emotional distress. Spiro also pointed out that Unsworth’s name did not appear in the tweets. “Who ever heard of an accusation of a crime against some dude?” he said. He characterized the exchange between Musk and Unsworth as an argument. “In arguments,” Spiro said, “you insult people.”

Newly leaked documents reveal that Away has barred employees from discussing The Verge’s investigation into workplace conditions on either their personal or professional social media channels. “Please do not share the article,” managers told their direct reports. “Please do not fave/like/comment or interact with any commentary (negative or positive) through either your personal or professional accounts.”
Employees were also alerted to the fact that The Verge will be speaking about the story live on CNBC this afternoon. “The reporter from the article is apparently slated to appear on CNBC,” a manager said. “The direction we’re getting is to continue with the protocol of not responding to inbounds relating to the article.”
The news comes hours after CEO Steph Korey apologized for her intimidating and manipulative behavior, which was revealed in numerous leaked Slack logs published by The Verge yesterday. “I can imagine how people felt reading those messages from the past, because I was appalled to read them myself,” she said.
The investigation from The Verge revealed how Korey has used Away’s core company values to push employees nearly to the breaking point. Last year, she told a group of customer experience managers that she was taking away their paid time off in order to support their career development. “In an effort to support you in developing your skills, I am going to help you learn the career skill of accountability. To hold you accountable...no more [paid time off] or [work from home] requests will be considered from the 6 of you,” she said (emphasis hers). “I hope everyone in this group appreciates the thoughtfulness I’ve put into creating this career development opportunity and that you’re all excited to operate consistently with our core values.”
Korey and her co-founder Jen Rubio do not allow employees to email each other and ask that direct messaging in Slack be kept to a minimum. The result is that almost all conversations at Away take place in public Slack channels. Many former Away employees noted that while these rules were supposed to create more transparency, in practice, they actually fostered a culture of fear. Korey was known to rip into people for making even minor mistakes. “You could hear her typing and you knew something bad was going to happen,” a customer experience says in the article.
On Friday, CNBC received a statement from Korey, which the network’s SF bureau chief Sally Shin tweeted. “I am sincerely sorry for what I said and how I said it,” it read. “It was wrong, plain and simple. We want Away to be a company that sets the highest standards for how we treat our employees and help them grow. Over the last 12 months we’ve invested in creating a culture that allows our people to thrive, including executive coaching for the senior staff, diversity and inclusion training for everyone at the company, 360 reviews, establishing employee resource groups and adding 100 plus new team members to better divide workloads. I am working to be better every day and I promise to keep at it for the sake of our employees, our customers and our company.”
The story inside Away Luggage here is maddening. Window into perils of growing at all cost mentality...  https://www.theverge.com/2019/12/5/20995453/away-luggage-ceo-steph-korey-toxic-work-environment-travel-inclusion …
Emotional baggage: inside the toxic work environment at Away
Away promised a company culture of travel and inclusion, but former employees say CEO Steph Korey uses the company values to get people to work harder and longer.
Some former Away employees said they are unsatisfied with her response. “It’s not like this was the first time she’s needed reprimanding for her management and conduct,” one former worker told The Verge. “She knows exactly who she’s hurt, and to just issue a ho-hum blanket apology now to the public, feels like it was done just to save face and slow down order returns that are coming in. It’s not right.”
Another former employee told The Verge, “While it’s nice to see they are taking steps to better the environment, from my personal interactions with current employees, I know they are far from fixing the toxic environment they have already created. And while it’s also nice newer employees can benefit from some of these steps, it doesn’t correct the pain she caused me or any of the other former employees — either on a personal, emotional or financial level.” The former employee says they were let go without any severance. “From my [point of view], she isn’t looking back at those messages thinking, ‘Oh my impact didn’t match my intention.’ Her intention was clear to always tear people down.”
Just before 4PM ET on Friday, Korey posted an additional message to her personal Twitter account expressing “mistakes as we’ve built Away,” in which she goes on to say, “What you read in the article doesn’t reflect the company we want to be,; and we will continue to work and improve. I want to be clear that the Away I am committed to is one where we set the highest standards for how we treat our people and help them grow.”
Added additional public comment from Away CEO Steph Korey, released on Twitter this afternoon, and further context regarding former employees’ reaction to Korey’s statements.

veryAvery felt out of place at Away. Like many of the executives at the popular direct-to-consumer luggage brand, she’d gone to an Ivy League college, worked at a popular startup, and honed an intense work ethic that set her apart from the pack. But the higher-ups, who were almost all white and straight, still never gave her the time of day. “It was very clear who was in the clique,” she says.
Originally, Avery had joined because of the brand’s popularity — the hard-shell suitcases were everywhere: in overheads, luggage carousels, subway ads — but she also wanted to believe in the mission. Away promised a lifestyle of inclusion and nice vacations. It was also founded by two women (one a person of color) who sought to run a globally minded business. “In my mind, it’s a trivial product but the brand is more than just luggage,” Avery says. “It’s about travel.” As the months went by and she got a closer glimpse at the growth and image-obsessed culture, however, she started to feel like the mission was just a smokescreen to get employees to work harder and longer.
Like many fast-growing startups, Away’s workplace is organized around digital communication. It’s how employees talk, plan projects, and get feedback from co-workers and higher-ups. Away used the popular chat app Slack, which has the motto “where work happens.” But of course, being a startup, a lot of other chatter happened there, too.
“YOU COULD HEAR HER TYPING AND YOU KNEW SOMETHING BAD WAS GOING TO HAPPEN”
When a co-worker invited Avery to join a private Slack channel called #Hot-Topics filled with LGBTQ folks and people of color, she was relieved to find that she wasn’t the only one who felt uncomfortable with Away’s purported mission and company culture. “It was a lot of like, ‘This person did this not-woke thing,’ or ‘Those people did something insensitive,’” she recalls. In other words, it was a safe space where marginalized employees could vent.
It was also against company policy. Away embraced Slack in more ways than one — its co-founder, Jen Rubio, is engaged to its CEO Stewart Butterfield — but it took things further than most startups. Employees were not allowed to email each other, and direct messages were supposed to be used rarely (never about work, and only for small requests, like asking if someone wanted to eat lunch). Private channels were also to be created sparingly and mainly for work-specific reasons, so making channels to, say, commiserate about a tough workday was not encouraged.
The rules had been implemented in the name of transparency, but employees say they created a culture of intimidation and constant surveillance. Once, when a suitcase was sent out with a customer’s incomplete initials stenciled onto the luggage tag, CEO Steph Korey said the person in charge must have been “brain dead” and threatened to take over the project. “Slack bullying is a thing,” explains a former member of the creative team we’ll call Erica*. “In my experience there, it’s extensive and relentless. It wasn’t just co-workers pinning things on other people — it came from the execs.”
Korey was infamous for tearing into people on Slack. “You could hear her typing and you knew something bad was going to happen,” says a former customer experience associate we’ll call Caroline*. Yet while her feedback was almost always sent online, its effects were felt in the real world, often when employees burst into tears.
So when the executive’s name unexpectedly popped into #Hot-Topics the morning of May 16th, 2018, employees knew something was wrong. She’d found out about the channel from Erin Grau, the head of people, who said language in the room had made at least one person uncomfortable. “I thought, Damn, she’s gonna see us talking about some stupid stuff, but whatever,” recalls a former marketing manager named Emily*. She hoped Korey would at least find the conversations funny.
That hope evaporated the next day when Korey began calling people into a room one by one. There, flanked by the company’s head of people and general counsel, she told six people they were being let go. “You’ve been discriminatory,” employees remember her saying. “The stuff you said was hateful, even racist. You no longer have a job at this company.” Emily, who is a person of color, was shocked. “That was jarring — three white people telling me I was racist,” she says.
Korey disputes ever using the terms “racist” and “hate speech,” although multiple sources confirmed these were the words she used.
“THEY PREY ON PEOPLE WHO WERE NEVER COOL LIKE ME”
The situation bruised employee morale, according to leaked Slack logs and interviews The Verge conducted with 14 former workers. But it was consistent with a pattern of behavior from the company’s top leaders.
Employees were asked to work exceedingly long hours and limit their paid time off. Their projects were brutally criticized by executives on public Slack channels. They were reprimanded for not answering messages immediately — even late at night and on weekends.
The cutthroat culture allowed the company to grow at hyperspeed, developing a cult following with celebrities and millennials alike. But it also opened a yawning gap between how Away appears to its customers and what it’s like to actually work there. The result is a brand consumers love, a company culture people fear, and a cadre of former employees who feel burned out and coerced into silence.

“They prey on people who were never cool like me,” Caroline says. “It’s a cult brand, and you get sucked into the cool factor. Because of that, they can manipulate you.”
“LUGGAGE IS ONLY THE BEGINNING”
KoreyKorey and Rubio met in 2011 while working at the trendy direct-to-consumer eyewear company Warby Parker. There, Korey implemented the lessons she’d learned at Bloomingdale’s years before. “The things I learned there about retail markups, markdowns, wholesaling, licensing, and the department store supply chain all later became the very things we would avoid at Warby Parker,” she said in an interview in Fortune.
Their aim was to sell “first-class luggage at a coach price” by cutting out the middleman and marketing directly to consumers. It was a model perfected by brands like Dollar Shave Club, Glossier, and Everlane: direct-to-consumer powerhouses that, through some alchemy of Facebook ads, freckled models, and bold sans serif fonts, had elevated themselves out of their business category to achieve tech company success.
Following this blueprint, Korey and Rubio positioned Away as a travel company, not a luggage brand. “We’re working to create the perfect version of everything people need to travel more seamlessly,” Rubio said in a 2018 interview. “Luggage is only the beginning.”
To make their brand even more aspirational, Away partnered with models and it-girls like Karlie Kloss, Julia Restoin Roitfeld, and Rashida Jones to promote the bags on social media. This was Rubio’s wheelhouse: she’d managed social strategy at Warby Parker and knew how to make Away hyper-relevant.
Korey, for her part, didn’t have to work hard to project an aspirational lifestyle. The CEO grew up in Ohio in a 55,000-square-foot historic mansion with an indoor swimming pool and three dining rooms. She’d gone to boarding school, then landed in Bloomingdale’s executive development program while at Brown University.
“IT JUST CREATED A CULTURE OF BULLYING”
But for all of her privilege, no one denied the executive’s fanatical work ethic. Where Rubio’s job seemed to involve glamorous travel and speaking events, and many employees say they never interacted with her, Korey was always in the office. She managed all of the company’s operations and was regularly online past 1AM.
The CEO often vacillated between being funny and relatable to hyper-critical and even cruel. Employees say she swore during interviews, cackled at people’s jokes, and took new hires to lunch, telling stories about her own mistakes. Once, during an interview, a woman remarked that she was drawn to Away because she was a millennial and it was a millennial-friendly product. “I’m a millennial, too,” Korey said. Later, that same employee was told by her manager that Korey had referred to the team as a bunch of “millennial twats.”
Korey was adamant that clear feedback was critical to employees’ growth. She was blunt when she didn’t agree with someone and encouraged managers not to shy away from harsh criticism. Erica, who managed a small team, questioned whether this strategy actually worked. “It didn’t feel like I was helping my direct reports grow,” she says.
When the photo team took suitcases to a shoot in the Hamptons and brought them back banged up and covered in sand, an employee who’d started that week was blamed for the “unacceptable” error and called out publicly on Slack. (The bags had eventually made their way to customers, and executives were furious.) “It could’ve just been a co-worker pulling them aside and saying this isn’t cool,” Erica says. “It felt like they were publicly outing the situation so that everybody could follow along.”
Korey often framed her critiques in terms of Away’s core company values: thoughtful, customer-obsessed, iterative, empowered, accessible, in it together. Empowered employees didn’t schedule time off when things were busy, regardless of how much they’d been working. Customer-obsessed employees did whatever it took to make consumers happy, even if it came at the cost of their own well-being. The framework echoed the tough company culture at Amazon where employees are taught to forget old habits and embrace a new set of ideals.
TRANSPARENCY SEEMED LIKE IT WAS JUST A PRETENSE FOR KOREY TO MICROMANAGE AND EXERT CONTROL
The intensity prompted employees to form small groups, chatting in texts about the toxic company culture. “Everyone kind of found their tribe and stuck to them because you needed to have allies there if you were gonna stay there,” says Serena*, a marketing manager.
But even this seemed like it could get them in trouble. From the beginning, Korey and Rubio had banned direct messages on Slack for anything related to work. Ostensibly, this was supposed to make the culture more transparent. “Over the course of our careers, Jen and I observed situations where women and underrepresented groups were often excluded from key emails or meetings,” Korey said in a statement to The Verge. “Slack affords levels of inclusion and transparency email simply doesn’t. With email the original author gets to pick who is included in the conversation and whose voices won’t be heard. That’s not the company we want.”
In practice, however, it did the opposite. Transparency seemed like it was just a pretense for Korey to micromanage and exert control. Marginalized employees felt silenced by the cutthroat environment and executives like Korey who used mistakes as an excuse to nitpick. “Steph has the drive and the personality of someone who could be very successful,” Erica says. “She embodies what we all aspire to be. But she does it in a way that’s absolutely not what I want to be.”
Ironically, Korey described Rubio as her “work wife” when the pair had worked at Warby Parker. “What was so nice about the relationship is we could lean on each other to complain every once in a while, like if a project wasn’t going well,” she explained in a podcast interview.
To Avery, this was just more hypocrisy at Away: the founders were allowed to complain to one another in private, but employees were expected to have almost every conversation in public.

“YOU ARE JOINING A MOVEMENT”
InIn the summer of 2017, Lauren joined Away as a customer experience associate. She was one year out of college, thrilled at the prospect of working for a brand she’d seen all over Instagram.
At the time, the company had around 50 employees. “The energy was light and supportive,” she recalls. Her salary, which was around $40,000, wasn’t a lot to live on, but it also wasn’t out of the ordinary for someone just starting out in New York City.
Lauren’s job was to answer customer calls and emails, getting the “queue” of customer inquiries down to zero. On a busy day, Lauren and her co-workers answered about 40 phone calls and responded to 100 emails each.
From the beginning, Korey and Rubio were masterful at getting these young employees hyped up about their jobs. “You are joining a movement,” they would say. “Everyone wants to be a part of this.” Lauren and the 12 other associates on customer experience felt lucky, even chosen. They worked long hours and bonded over crazy customer stories, intoxicated by the energy of the company.
SHE WAS SITTING IN BED WEARING A FACE MASK, STILL WORKING
Lauren’s manager, Xandie Pasanen, a woman who’d risen through the ranks to lead the customer experience organization, was relentlessly positive and upbeat. When Korey needed the team to stay late, Pasanen would send long Slack messages on her behalf, infusing her sentences with Away’s values. “She would say ‘I’ll be working late tonight — dinner is here if any of you can work beside me. I mean, leave if you have to, but I have to stay,’” Lauren’s teammate Caroline says. “Her messages were long and loving, but they were manipulative. If she didn’t hear from you she’d just contact you directly asking for verbal confirmation you could work.”
As the holidays approached, the team had to work around the clock to keep up with customer demand. In December, Caroline was wrapping up work at 1AM when she saw a Slack message from Pasanen. “Okay everyone! Take a photo with your computer in bed when you get home. Here’s mine!” She was sitting in bed wearing a face mask, still working.
The queue of unanswered customer emails kept growing, and the team was too small to keep up. Lauren and Caroline were working on weekends, often eating dinner around midnight. They told themselves to just keep pushing through to New Year’s Day when they would finally have a day off.
Then, on December 31st, Pasanen sent them a message. “Happy New Years Eve!” she began. She then laid out two scenarios: either they could take the day off as planned, and the team would fall even more behind, or they could each work for six hours and get a month off as a reward

“I burst into tears,” Caroline says. “I was trying to finish so I could have my first day off in weeks. I was telling my mom, ‘I just need a break and I can’t get one,’ and she was like ‘just say no.’ I was like, ‘I can’t do that.’”
Korey is careful to point out that working on New Year’s had been a choice. “The team decided they’d prefer to work the holiday and get a month off because the team knew this day was really important for keeping the customer experience on track,” she said in an email to The Verge.
Even so, Caroline and her co-workers were suspicious about the executive’s motives. No one had received overtime pay — which, given the hours they were working, seemed questionable — and many suspected the CEO was concerned. “The rumor was she was nervous it wasn’t legal to have us working so much without overtime, so she went overboard giving us time off,” Caroline says. (The company has since changed its policy to pay customer experience associates overtime.)
The team pulled through — many worked from airports or snuck away from planned family outings — and got customer emails under control. But Caroline knew it wasn’t over. She was overworked and underpaid, but something in her wanted to keep going. “I wanted to move closer to work so I could work more, but I couldn’t afford it,” she says.  The following Thanksgiving, Lila*, a customer experience manager, planned a trip to go see her family in the hopes that, this year, they’d keep up with consumer demand. It was a risky move: Away was rolling out a limited edition line called the Solstice Collection, which Town & Country dubbed “just what you need for holiday travel.”
But the launch was already plagued with problems. The suitcases were arriving at Away’s warehouses with stickers that were difficult to peel off, and workers were almost two weeks late shipping them out. To make matters worse, the operations team wasn’t communicating with customer experience associates about when people could expect their bags to ship. That made it difficult to tell customers when their bags were coming.
On November 20th, 2018, Korey looked at the number of customers waiting for shipments and realized they had a big problem. “I need to know tonight if we’ve reached out to these customers yet,” she wrote at 10PM. “I have seen multiple [customer experience] Managers active on Slack since I asked this question so please just give me an answer.”
The managers explained that they were waiting to reach out to customers until the operations team told them when the bags would actually ship. But Korey was far from satisfied. She asked them to come up with a new plan on how to communicate with customers and present it to her the next day.
Lila asked a direct report to explain the strategy to Korey since she was going to be on the way to the airport. The idea was to expedite shipping on late orders and communicate to customers when they could expect to receive their bags. Lila’s report noted this was going “above and beyond.”
When Korey saw the plan, she was furious. “If we were just going above and beyond we could send them all 10 free suitcases,” she vented in Slack, in front of the entire company. “Or we could send them all 100 free suitcases, that would REALLY be above and beyond.”
The team, near tears, stayed silent. “We just kind of let her rant,” one employee said. Caroline, who was watching the tirade, was shocked. “It was like having your pants pulled down in front of the company and then they just walk away,” she says.
Seeing what was happening on Slack, Lila turned her car around and headed back to the office. There would be no family vacation after all.

have their associates cancel future travel plans, at least until the holidays were over. Those who’d already booked tickets would be asked if they could work from home. “We were like ‘No, no we’re not gonna do that. That’s not moral,” Caroline says. But she knew she didn’t have a choice.
Caroline was protective of how close her team had become. If one person was forced to stay, the rest were likely to follow suit. “They exploited the fact that we were close,” she says. “They knew we would take a bullet for each other and they just used it. Everyone was crushed. But they weren’t going to leave if their friends stayed.”
The associates tried to keep their spirits high as they worked through the holiday season. At one point, a member of the retail team approached them tentatively and asked why they all seemed so cheerful. “How do you keep up a happy attitude? I see you over here talking and laughing… do Steph and Jen not talk to you like they do everyone else?” a former customer experience manager we’ll call Lindsey* remembers him asking. “We share the emotional burden,” she replied. “We go on walks. We have each other’s back. Do we work really efficiently? Like, 100 percent. But you gotta learn the tricks of the trade.”
By January, the team was completely burnt out and the positivity was starting to wane. “I would leave at nine. I wouldn’t eat until midnight, then I’d get in bed and work until I fell asleep,” Caroline remembers. And yet, customer emails kept piling up.
To Korey, this was unacceptable. She began randomly calling the customer experience line to see whether someone picked up, often berating the managers and screaming, “What is this shit!” at her desk if her call went unanswered.

Korey says these “spot checks” are a typical part of any retail company. “This isn’t the only area we do this,” she adds. “In fact, we use secret shoppers at our retail stores, and we regularly place multiple combinations of e-commerce orders to ensure our fulfillment facilities are packing orders correctly.”
Once, when the managers were training new associates in the conference room, Korey burst through the doors. “Why aren’t you on the phones right now?” Caroline remembers her yelling. Caroline stepped between Korey and the team, who were looking at the spectacle in horror. “We had always guarded our team like mother bears,” she says.
The day before Valentine’s Day, Korey decided she was going to stop the team from taking any more time off. In a series of Slack messages that began at 3AM, she said, “I know this group is hungry for career development opportunities, and in an effort to support you in developing your skills, I am going to help you learn the career skill of accountability. To hold you accountable...no more [paid time off] or [work from home] requests will be considered from the 6 of you...I hope everyone in this group appreciates the thoughtfulness I’ve put into creating this career development opportunity and that you’re all excited to operate consistently with our core values.” (The emphasis is Korey’s.)
Four days later, when she noticed two managers still had time off on the calendar, she was livid. “If you all choose to utilize your empowerment to leave our customers hanging...you will have convinced me that this group does not embody Away’s core values,” she said. (Again, emphasis Korey’s.)
Korey said her messages were necessary to get the team back on track. “Managing people brings with it the responsibility to invest time and energy into providing thoughtful context around performance expectations and feedback,” she wrote in a statement to The Verge.

after Korey’s 3AM tirade, she announced that she was hiring a buffer to put between herself and the team: a vice president of customer experience, Monte Williams. The associates were thrilled.
Williams looked people in the eye, spoke to them with respect, and had over a decade of experience leading teams at brands like Rent the Runway. Those who’d been planning to quit decided to stay to learn what they could from this new manager.
Then, in mid-April, the team started to notice something strange. Customer emails were piling up during what was supposed to be a slow period. “We had 100 extra people in our inbox. We were like, what’s going on?” Caroline remembers.
It was a Groundhog Day scenario. The company was rolling out new customization options on the luggage, and the operations team was woefully understaffed. Bags weren’t going out on time and, once again, the customer experience associates couldn’t get a clear estimate on when they were expected to ship. This time, however, Korey couldn’t push the team to tackle their ever-growing inbox: Williams was standing in her way.
SOME TEAM MEMBERS WERE MISSING CALLS WHEN THEY STEPPED AWAY TO USE THE BATHROOM
The customer experience executive wanted to prioritize his team’s mental well-being, but the inbox of customer emails was the highest it had ever been. The associates oscillated between feeling grateful that someone finally cared about them — Williams was the first person who’d ever really voiced appreciation for their work — and feeling worried he didn’t understand how behind they were getting. At its peak, the inbox of customer inquiries was 4,000 emails deep.
In May, Korey created a Slack channel titled #may-cx-issue to try to address this issue. If Williams wasn’t going to push his team, then she would have to step back in. She began grilling him on why managers — many of whom were working 16-hour days — weren’t answering more customer emails.
Once, a team member tried to explain that managers didn’t handle as many customer emails because they were charged with leading the team. But Korey didn’t buy it. “I’m just going to be honest here, your response to me reads like [the managers] don’t really do anything positive for the business anyway so it doesn’t matter if they’re here or not,” she said.

Williams tried to smooth things over, explaining that some team members were missing calls simply when they stepped away to use the bathroom. “We all always assumed people went to the bathroom,” she responded. “Let’s please stop talking about that as if it’s a surprising Friday update.” Of the interaction, Caroline says, “It was like watching him get stoned to death.”
On May 25th, the team saw a 5:30PM meeting on their calendars and knew the time had come: Williams was being fired. He’d lasted less than six months.
For Caroline, that was the final straw. “I just lost my shit,” she says. “Everybody loved Monte. Everybody. I was just like, ‘This is the first time anybody has cared about the team, and you’re taking it away from us. You really don’t care at all.’”
Within a few months, she would give notice as well.
When asked about why Williams was let go, Grau, the company’s head of people, noted the team’s poor performance. “During the Winter/Spring of 2019, it became apparent that we were not providing a world-class customer service experience. As a result, we made significant changes to the team,” she added in a statement emailed to The Verge.
Korey also added that the move was a last-ditch effort to save a struggling team. “I care tremendously about the Away team and we make every effort to help struggling employees succeed in their role. Only when we’ve exhausted all coaching options do we feel the next step is to help an employee transition to a new career outside of Away and we provide full support during this process,” she wrote.

Hi everyone, I’m back after a couple weeks away — partly because of the holidays, partly because the trailer selection just wasn’t very good. (I’m sorry, I couldn’t post another Cats trailer). I got to watch a few things during the break though, with the biggest being Joker.\
There’s something incredible about indie filmmaking styles now being so mainstream that a major comic book movie is able to emulate them. All of Joker feels this way to an extent, but the clearest moments are the occasional sequences that have the camera floating close beside a silent, emotional Joaquin Phoenix, in the oddest of homages to Terrence Malick. I love how the filmmakers are trying to apply that vibe here, but it’s just way too hard to make that kind of emotional intimacy work with a character who, ultimately, is a clear-cut murderous villain. It makes for a lot of mixed tones and messages that the movie can’t quite line up, and frankly, probably shouldn’t.
One thing I will say I enjoyed is the movie’s (admittedly and appropriately controversial) music selection during the stairs sequence. The juxtaposition of a song so clearly associated with riling up crowds in sports stadiums with the seriousness of the film and the absurdity of the Joker suddenly becoming the Joker is just... perfect. I don’t think I’ve ever been so pleased by a musical cue.

Check out seven trailers from this week below... and since I left you all hanging the last two weeks, I’ve got a few bonus trailers below those that are from late November.
At long last, Scarlett Johansson’s Black Widow is getting her own film. One of the wonderful things about the MCU is how willing the studio is to let individual films dive deep into different genres, and Black Widow really feels like a straight-up spy thriller. I mean, with some over-the-top, Marvel-scale action sequences too. But also with some intimate fights and drama. It comes out May 1st.
Daniel Craig started his tenure as James Bond with a film that was not just good for a Bond movie, but was across the board worth watching. The rest of his Bond films? Not so much. No Time to Die is his final chance, and there are some big names on board to help out — Cary Joji Fukunaga directs, and Phoebe Waller-Bridge helped polish the script. For now, it kind of just feels like a Bond greatest hits collection; not so bad, but not so impressive, either. It film comes out April 8th.
Disney finally put out a full-length trailer for Mulan this week. It shows a colorful film, some gorgeous locations, and the setup to an obviously epic battle, while maintaining what feels to me like a really classic, Disney-approved storybook approach to the whole thing. It comes out March 27th.
Just Mercy has an all-star cast, with Jamie Foxx and Michael B. Jordan telling the true story of a man who was wrongly convicted of murder. This trailer is actually shorter than the first trailer that came out, but I think it does a much better job of just letting the movie play so that we can see how strong these performances are and why they’ll be worth watching. The film comes out on Christmas and expands wide on January 10th.
The Assistant, written and directed by Casting JonBenet creator Kitty Green, looks like a tense and intentionally discomforting film about sexual assault and abuse of power in the workplace. The entire movie unfolds over one day in the life of a new assistant, as she begins to see what’s going on around her. It opens January 31st in New York and LA before expanding in February.
There’s an inevitability to Marriage Story, a feeling of something like gravity: all-encompassing and firm, easy to forget it’s there as it slowly repels instead of attracts. Perhaps it’s due to director Noah Baumbach’s intimate direction and script, which, despite its wrenching subject matter, plays like a rom-com. There’s sharp dialogue, rich with double entendre and implied history, that’s delivered with an energy that makes it a real shame that it’s in the service of people falling apart, not coming together. Lines layer on top of and under one another, delivered with the easy rhythm of people who know each other intimately. The camera gets close, and we get to see them look at each other in ways that words fail to describe.

At the start of Marriage Story, the relationship is already over. Nicole (Scarlett Johansson) and Charlie (Adam Driver) Barber are seeing a mediator sometime after their decision to separate, expressing a desire to negotiate their transition to separate lives amicably and disrupt the life of their young son Henry as little as possible. They’re warned about how hostile the process can be so want to safeguard against the toxicity that normally comes with a divorce. They decide to not get lawyers. All of those well-meaning notions eventually crumble as Nicole and Charlie, seeking closure, get a divorce and succumb to the animosity and suspicion the legal system is built to breed. Charlie, a theater director, slowly realizes Nicole, an actress, wants to leave New York with their son and start over in Los Angeles.
Marriage Story isn’t necessarily a tragedy about a relationship; it’s about the long legal process we call divorce and how it can poison whatever noble intentions the involved parties had about remaining amicable. “This system rewards ugly behavior,” star divorce lawyer Nora Fanshaw (Laura Dern, maintaining almost all of her Big Little Lies energy) says to Nicole at one point. “At the end of this process,” Charlie’s lawyer, Jay Marotta (Ray Liotta, the perfect foil for Dern), tells him, “you’re going to hate me.”
It cannot be understated how good Driver and Johansson are as the Barbers. While Marriage Story is about divorce, it is not consumed by it. Instead, it slips between tones and moods, much the way people do even during the darkest times in their lives. The Barbers are funny and wry and caring and full of deep, inexpressible love and contempt. Each delivers long, lived-in monologues to other characters as they wander a room, leave the frame, or burst into song. A blowout argument shifts sympathies back and forth as Charlie and Nicole plumb their shared history for grievances to wield as weapons, some more devastating than others.
Marriage Story isn’t a joyless film. It’s clever and witty, with plenty of jokes about California, thanks to the bi-coastal tension of its central pair. It also co-stars Wallace Shawn (Vizzini in The Princess Bride). He’s not terribly important to the plot, but every time I saw him on-screen, it was hard not to shout “inconceivable!” (Honestly, that’s a good response for some of the behavior in this film.) Julie Hagerty and Merritt Wever, who respectively play Nicole’s mom and sister Cassie, are frequently hilarious as they struggle with their familial duty to support Nicole in spite of their overwhelming fondness for Charlie
One of Marriage Story’s biggest successes lies in its straightforwardness. It’s not a story out to change how you think of relationships or marriage. It strives for honesty, even if it’s cliché. Charlie and Nicole struggle through the same things couples in countless relationships learn the hard way, like how all arguments are the same argument had different ways, how the balance between each partner’s fulfillment must be carefully minded, and how the problems that can bring about the end are all there in the beginning.
The hope of Marriage Story, then, is not ‘til death do them part. Rather, it’s the dignity of any good ending, one that gives you the clarity to understand the meaning of everything that came before it.

ith more than half a billion internet subscribers, India is one of the largest and fastest-growing markets for digital consumers, but adoption is uneven among businesses. As digital capabilities improve and connectivity becomes omnipresent, technology is poised to quickly and radically change nearly every sector of India’s economy. That is likely to both create significant economic value and change the nature of work for tens of millions of Indians
In Digital India: Technology to transform a connected nation (PDF–3MB), the McKinsey Global Institute highlights the rapid spread of digital technologies and their potential value to the Indian economy by 2025 if government and the private sector work together to create new digital ecosystems
By many measures, India is well on its way to becoming a digitally advanced country. Propelled by the falling cost and rising availability of smartphones and high-speed connectivity, India is already home to one of the world’s largest and fastest-growing bases of digital consumers and is digitizing faster than many mature and emerging economies.

India had 560 million internet subscribers in September 2018, second only to China. Digital services are growing in parallel (Exhibit 1). Indians download more apps—12.3 billion in 2018—than any country except China and spend more time on social media—an average of 17 hours a week—than social media users in China and the United States. The share of Indian adults with at least one digital financial account has more than doubled since 2011, to 80 percent, thanks in large part to the government’s mass financial-inclusion program, Jan-Dhan Yojana.
To put this digital growth in context, we analyzed 17 mature and emerging economies across 30 dimensions of digital adoption since 2014 and found that India is digitizing faster than all but one other country in the study, Indonesia. Our Country Digital Adoption Index covers three elements: digital foundation (cost, speed, and reliability of internet service); digital reach (number of mobile devices, app downloads, and data consumption), and digital value, (how much consumers engage online by chatting, tweeting, shopping, or streaming). India’s score rose by 90 percent since 2014 (Exhibit 2). In absolute terms, its score is low—32 on a scale of 100—so there remains ample room to grow.
The public sector has been a strong catalyst for India’s rapid digitization. The government’s efforts to ramp up Aadhaar, the national biometric digital identity program, has played a major role. Aadhaar has enrolled 1.2 billion people since it was introduced in 2009, making it the single largest digital ID program in the world, hastening the spread of other digital services. For example, almost 870 million bank accounts were linked to Aadhaar by February 2018, compared with 399 million in April 2017 and 56 million in January 2014. Likewise, the Goods and Services Tax Network, established in 2013, brings all transactions of about 10.3 million indirect tax-paying businesses onto one digital platform, creating a powerful incentive for businesses to digitize their operations.

At the same time, private sector innovation has helped bring internet-enabled services to millions of consumers and made online usage more accessible. For example, Reliance Jio’s strategy of bundling virtually free smartphones with mobile-service subscriptions has spurred innovation and competitive pricing. Data costs have plummeted by more than 95 percent since 2013 and fixed-line download speeds quadrupled between 2014 and 2017. As a result, mobile data consumption per user grew by 152 percent annually—more than twice the rates in the United States and China (Exhibit 3).

Exhibit 3

Global and local digital businesses have recognized the opportunity in India and are creating services tailored to its consumers and unique operating conditions. Media companies are making content available in India’s 22 official languages, for example. And by tailoring its mobile payments and commerce platform to India’s market, Alibaba-backed Paytm has registered more than 100 million electronic “Know Your Customer”-compliant mobile wallet users and nine million merchants.

The pace of growth is helping India’s poorer states to narrow the digital gap with wealthier states. Lower-income states like Uttar Pradesh and Jharkhand are expanding internet infrastructure such as base tower stations and increasing the penetration of internet services to new customers faster than wealthier states. Uttar Pradesh alone added close to 36 million internet subscribers between 2014 and 2018. Ordinary Indians in many parts of the country—including small towns and rural areas—can now read the news online, order food delivery via a phone app, video chat with a friend (Indians log 50 million video-calling minutes a day on WhatsApp), shop at a virtual retailer, send money to a family member using their phone, or watch a movie streamed to a handheld device.

Despite these advances, India has plenty of room to grow. Only about 40 percent of the populace has an internet subscription. While many people have digital bank accounts, 90 percent of all retail transactions in India, by volume, are still made with cash. E-commerce revenue is growing by more than 25 to 30 percent per year, yet only 5 percent of trade in India is done online, compared with 15 percent in China in 2015. Looking ahead, India’s digital consumers are poised for robust growth.
We surveyed more than 600 large and small companies in India to gauge the level of digitization in various sectors as well as the underlying traits, activities, and mind-sets that drive digitization at the firm level. We used each company’s answers to score its level of digitization and then ranked them in the MGI India Firm Digitization Index. Companies in the top quartile, which we characterize as digital leaders, had an average score of 58.2 (relative to a maximum potential value of 100), while those in the bottom quartile, the digital laggards, averaged 33.2. The median score was 46.2. A higher score indicates that the company is using digital in its day-to-day operations more extensively (implementing CRM systems, accepting digital modes of payments, etc.) and in a more organized manner (having separate analytics team, centralized digital organization, etc.) than the ones with lower scores.

Our survey found that, on average, leaders outscored others by 70 percent on strategy, 40 percent on organization, and 31 percent on capabilities (Exhibit 4).
Differences within sectors are higher than those across sectors. While some sectors have more digital leaders than others, top-quartile companies are found in all sectors—even those considered resistant to technology, such as farming or construction. Conversely, sectors with more leaders, such as information and communication technology, still have companies in the bottom quartile.

However, India’s digital leaders generally do share common traits in terms of the following areas:

Digital strategy: Leaders are 30 percent more likely than bottom-quartile companies to fully integrate digital and global strategies and 2.3 times more likely to sell on e-commerce platforms. Leaders are 3.5 times more likely to say digital disruptions led them to change core operations and 40 percent more likely to say digital is a top priority for investment.
Digital organization: Leaders are 14.5 times more likely than bottom-quartile companies to centralize digital management, and five times more likely to have a stand-alone, properly staffed analytics team. Top-quartile firms are also 70 percent more likely than bottom-quartile firms to say their CEO is “supportive and directly engaged” in digital initiatives.
Digital capabilities: Leaders are 2.6 times more likely than bottom-quartile firms to use digital tools to manage customer relationships and 2.5 times more likely to use digital tools to coordinate the management of their core business operations.
The gap between digital leaders and other firms is not insurmountable. In some cases, even when the gap is large, lagging companies may be able to begin closing it by digitizing in small, relatively simple ways. Social media marketing is a good example. While bottom-quartile firms are much less likely than leaders to use social media, e-commerce, or listing platforms, each of these channels is cheap and easily accessible and there is little to stop a business owner with a high-speed internet connection and a smartphone from taking advantage of them.

For now, large companies (defined in our survey as having revenue greater than 5 billion rupees, or about $70 million) are more likely to have the financial resources and expertise needed to invest in some advanced technologies, such as artificial intelligence and the Internet of Things. But growing high-speed internet connectivity and falling data costs may soon make some of these technologies available to small-business owners and even sole proprietors.

Indeed, our survey found small businesses are ahead of big companies in terms of accepting digital payments: 94 percent accept payment by debit or credit card, compared with only 79 percent of big companies; for digital wallets the difference was 78 percent versus 49 percent.

Our survey found 70 percent of small businesses use their own websites to reach clients, compared with 82 percent of big companies. Small businesses are less likely than big companies to buy display ads on the web (37 percent versus 66 percent), but they are ahead of big companies in connecting with customers via social media, and more likely to use search-engine optimization. More than 60 percent of the small firms surveyed use LinkedIn to hire talent, and about half believe that most of their employees today need basic digital skills. While only 51 percent of smaller firms said they “extensively” sell goods and services on their websites (compared with 73 percent of big businesses), small businesses use e-commerce platforms and other digital sales channels just as much as large firms and are equally likely to receive orders through digital means like WhatsApp
Companies that innovate and digitize rapidly will be better placed to take advantage of India’s large, connected market, which could include up to 700 million smartphone users and 840 million internet users by 2023. In the context of rapidly improving technology and falling data costs, technology-enabled business models could become pervasive over the next decade. That will likely create significant economic value.

We consider economic impact in three broad areas. First are core digital sectors, such as IT-BPM, digital communications, and electronics manufacturing. Second are newly digitizing sectors such as financial services, agriculture, healthcare, logistics, and manufacturing, which are not traditionally considered part of India’s digital economy but have the potential to rapidly adopt new technologies. Third are government services and labor markets, which can use digital technologies in new ways.
India’s core digital sectors accounted for about $170 billion—or 7 percent—of GDP in 2017–18. This comprises value added from core digital sectors: $115 billion from IT-BPM, $45 billion from digital communications, and $10 billion from electronics manufacturing. Based on industry revenue, cost structures, and growth trends, we estimate these sectors could grow significantly faster than GDP: value-added contribution in 2025 could range from $205 billion to $250 billion for IT-BPM, from $100 billion to $130 billion for electronics manufacturing, and $50 billion to $55 billion for digital communications. The total, between $355 billion and $435 billion, may account for 8 to 10 percent of India’s 2025 GDP.
Alongside these already digitized sectors, India stands to create more value if it can nurture new and emerging digital ecosystems in sectors such as agriculture, education, energy, financial services, healthcare, and logistics. The benefits of digital applications in each of these newly digitizing sectors are already visible. For example, in logistics, tracking vehicles in real time has enabled shippers to reduce fleet turnaround time by 50 to 70 percent. Similarly, digitized supply chains help companies reduce their inventory by up to 20 percent. Farmers can cut the cost of growing crops by 15 to 20 percent using data on soil conditions that enables them to minimize the use of fertilizers and other inputs.
Digital can improve government services and the efficiency of India’s job market
Digital technologies can also create significant value in areas such as government services and the job market. Moving government subsidy transfers, procurement, and other transactions online can enhance public-sector efficiency and productivity, while creating online labor marketplaces could considerably improve the efficiency of India’s fragmented and largely informal job market.

To unlock this value will require widespread adoption and implementation. The economic value will be proportionate to the extent digital applications permeate production processes, from supply chains to delivery channels. Our estimates of potential economic value depend on each sector’s digital adoption rate by 2025; where the readiness of India’s firms and government agencies is low and significant effort will be required to catalyze broad-based digitization, adoption may be low, between 20 to 40 percent of the potential. Where private-sector readiness is high and government policy already supports large-scale digitization, adoption could be as high as 60 to 80 percent.
In all, we estimate that India’s newly digitizing sectors have the potential to create sizable economic value by 2025: from $130 billion to $170 billion in financial services, including digital payments; $50 billion to $65 billion in agriculture; $25 billion to $35 billion each in retail and e-commerce, logistics and transportation; and $10 billion in energy and healthcare (Exhibit 5). Digitizing more government services and benefit transfers could yield economic value of $20 billion to $40 billion, while digital skill-training and job-market platforms could yield up to $70 billion. While these ranges underscore large potential value, realization of this value is not guaranteed: losing momentum on government policies that enable the digital economy would mean India could realize less than half of the potential value by 2025.
Digital can create jobs but will require new skills and some labor redeployment
Changes brought by digital adoption will disrupt India’s labor force as well as its industries. We estimate that as many as 60 million to 65 million new jobs could be created from the direct and indirect impact of productivity-boosting digital applications. These jobs could be enabled in industries as diverse as construction and manufacturing, agriculture, trade and hotels, IT-BPM, finance, media and telecom, and transport and logistics.

However, some work will be automated or rendered obsolete. We estimate that all or parts of 40 million to 45 million existing jobs could be affected by 2025. These include data-entry operators, bank tellers, clerks, and insurance claims- and policy-processing staff. Millions of people who currently hold these positions will need to be retrained and redeployed.

Jobs of the future will be more skill-intensive. Along with rising demand for skills in emerging digital technologies (such as the Internet of Things, artificial intelligence, and 3-D printing), demand for higher cognitive, social, and emotional skills, such as creativity, unstructured problem solving, teamwork, and communication, will also increase. These are skills that machines, for now, are unable to master. As the technology evolves and develops, individuals will need to constantly learn and relearn marketable skills throughout their lifetime. India will need to create affordable and effective education and training programs at scale, not just for new job market entrants but also for midcareer workers.

To capture the potential economic value that we size at a macro level, businesses will need to deliver digital technologies at a micro level: that is, how they use digital technologies to fundamentally alter day-to-day activities.

Three digital forces will drive these shifts: One is the greater ease with which people can connect, collaborate, transact, and share information; another is the opportunity for companies to increase productivity by automating routine tasks; the third is the greater ease with which organizations can analyze data to make insights and improve decision making.

The interplay of these forces will create new data ecosystems, which in turn will spur new products, services, and channels in virtually every business sector, and create economic value for consumers as well as those members of the ecosystem that best adapt their business models.


India’s potential on the global digital landscape
To highlight the kinds of business model changes that companies should predict and prepare for, we examine how this connect-automate-analyze trio can play out across four sectors: agriculture, healthcare, retail, and logistics.

Digital agriculture
India’s farms are small, averaging a little more than one hectare in size, with yields ranging from 50 to 90 percent of those in Brazil, China, and other developing economies. Many factors contribute to this. Indian farmers have a dearth of farm machinery and relatively little data on soil, weather, and other variables. Poor storage and logistics allows produce to go to waste before reaching consumers—$15 billion worth in 2013.

Digital technology can alter this ecosystem in several ways. Precision advisory services—using real-time granular data to optimize inputs such as fertilizer and pesticides—can increase yields by 15 percent or more. After harvest, farmers could use online marketplaces to transact with a larger pool of potential buyers. One such platform, the government’s electronic National Agriculture Market, has helped farmers increase revenue by up to 15 percent. Furthermore, online banking can provide the financial data farmers need to qualify for cheaper bank credit. Digital land records can make crop insurance more available. These and other digital innovations in Indian agriculture can help add $50 billion to $65 billion of economic value by 2025.

Digital healthcare
India has too few doctors, not enough hospital beds, and a low share of state spending on healthcare relative to GDP. While life expectancy has risen to 68.3 years from 37 in 1951, the country still ranks 125th among all nations on this parameter. Indian women are three times as likely to die in childbirth as women in Brazil, Russia, China, and South Africa—and ten times as likely as women in the United States.

Digital solutions can help alleviate the shortage of medical professionals by making doctors and nurses more productive. Telemedicine, for example, enables doctors to consult with patients over a digital voice or video link rather in person; this could allow them to see more patients overall and permit doctors in cities to serve patients in rural areas. Telemedicine could also be more cost effective: in trials and pilots, it cut consultation costs by about 30 percent. If telemedicine replaced 30 to 40 percent of in-person outpatient consultations, coupled with digitization in overall healthcare industry, India could save up to $10 billion in 2025.

Digital retail
More than 80 percent of all retail outlets in India—most of them sole proprietors or mom-and-pop shops—operate in the cash-driven informal economy. These businesses do not generate the financial records needed to apply for bank loans, limiting their growth potential. Large retailers have their own sets of challenges. Their reliance on manual store operations and high inventory levels is capital heavy. In many cases, their marketing practices are ineffective, and their prices are static regardless of inventory or demand.

Digital solutions could reshape much of the sector. E-commerce enables retailers to expand without capital-intensive physical stores. Some do not even bother with their own website, relying instead on third-party sites such as Amazon, which offer large, ready pools of shoppers along with logistics, inventory, and payment services, and customer data analytics. E-commerce creates financial records that attest to the creditworthiness of both buyers and sellers, making it cheaper to borrow. Digital marketing can inexpensively engage customers and build brand loyalty. We estimate e-commerce in India will grow faster than sales at brick-and-mortar outlets, allowing digital retail to increase its share of trade from 5 percent now to about 15 percent by 2025.

Digital logistics
India’s economy has grown by at least 6.5 percent annually for the last 20 years. Continuing at that pace of growth would challenge India’s logistics network, which already suffers from a fragmented trucking industry, inadequate railways infrastructure, and a shortage of warehousing. India spends about 14 percent of GDP on logistics, compared with 8 percent in the United States, according to McKinsey estimates.

Digital technology can disrupt even this traditional, physical sector. The government is creating a transactional e-marketplace, the National Logistics Platform, to connect shipping agencies, inland container depots, port authorities, banks, insurers, customs officials, and railways managers. By letting stakeholders share information and coordinate plans, the platform may speed up deliveries, reduce inventory requirements, and smooth order processing. At the same time, private firms are using digital technologies to streamline operations by moving freight booking online, automating customer service, installing tracking devices to monitor cargo movements, using real-time weather and traffic data to map efficient routes, and equipping trucks with internet-linked sensors to alert dispatchers when a vehicle needs servicing. According to McKinsey estimates, digital interventions that result in higher system efficiency and better asset utilization can reduce logistics cost by 15 to 25 percent.


What are the implications for companies, policy makers, and individuals?
For India to reap the full benefits of digitization—and minimize the pain of transitioning to a digital economy—business leaders, government officials, and individual citizens will need to play distinct roles while also working together.

Business
Business leaders will need to assess how and where digital may disrupt their company and industry and set priorities for how to adapt. Potential disruptions and benefits may be particularly large in India because of its scale, the rapid pace of digitization, and its relatively low productivity in many sectors. To benefit from these changes, companies need to act quickly and decisively to both adapt existing business models and to digitize internal operations. In this context, four imperatives stand out.
First, companies will need to take smart risks as they adapt current business models and adopt new, disruptive ones. Only 46 percent of Indian companies in our survey have an organization-wide plan to change their core operations to react to large-scale disruption.

Second, digital should be front of mind as executives plan. Customers are more digitally literate and have come to expect the convenience and speed of digital, whether shopping online or questioning a bill, but many companies have not reacted. In our survey, 80 percent of firms cite digital as a “top priority,” but only 41 percent say their digital strategy is fully integrated with their overall strategy.

Indian companies will need to invest in building digital capabilities, especially hiring people with the skills needed to start and accelerate a digital transformation.

Third, Indian companies will need to invest in building digital capabilities, especially hiring people with the skills needed to start and accelerate a digital transformation. That is challenging because many of India’s most talented workers emigrate. Companies could work with universities to recruit and develop skilled workers, beginning with digital natives who are currently in universities or have recently finished their studies. Companies also need to build deeper technology understanding and capabilities at all levels, including in the C-suite.

Finally, firms will need to be agile and think of themselves as digital-first organizations. This may need a new attitude that starts with a “test and learn” mind-set that encourages rapid iteration and has a high tolerance for failure and redeployment.

Government
India’s government has done much to encourage digital progress, from rationalizing regulations to improving infrastructure to launching Digital India, an ambitious initiative to double the size of the country’s digital economy. However, much needs to be done for India to realize its full potential.

National and state governments can help by partnering with the private sector to drive digitization, starting by putting the technology at the core of their operations. This helps by providing a market for digital solutions, which generates revenue for providers, encourages digital start-ups, and gives individuals more reasons to go online—whether to receive a cooking-gas subsidy, register a property purchase, or access any other government service.

Governments also can help by creating and administering public data sources that entrepreneurs can use to improve existing products and services and create new ones; by fostering a regulatory environment that supports digital adoption and protects citizens’ privacy; and by facilitating the evolution of labor markets in industries disrupted by automation.

Individuals
Individual Indians are already reaping the benefits of digitization as consumers, but they will need to be cognizant that its disruptive powers can affect their lives and work in other fundamental ways. For example, they will need to be aware of how digitally driven automation may change their work and what skills they will need to thrive in the future. Individuals will also need to become stewards of their personal data and skeptical consumers of information.

While India’s public and private sectors have propelled the country into the forefront of the world’s consumers of internet and digital applications over the past few years, its digitization story is far from over.

Navigating the emerging digital landscape will not be easy, but it is one of the golden keys to India’s future growth and prosperity. Unlocking the opportunities will be a challenge for the government, for businesses large and small, and for individual Indians, and there will be pain along with gains. But if India can accelerate its digital growth trajectory, the rewards will be palpable to millions of businesses and hundreds of millions of its citizens.

Since its founding in 1990, the McKinsey Global Institute (MGI) has sought to develop a
deeper understanding of the evolving global economy. As the business and economics
research arm of McKinsey & Company, MGI aims to provide leaders in the commercial,
public, and social sectors with the facts and insights on which to base management
and policy decisions.
MGI research combines the disciplines of economics and management, employing the
analytical tools of economics with the insights of business leaders. Our “micro-to-macro”
methodology examines microeconomic industry trends to better understand the broad
macroeconomic forces affecting business strategy and public policy. MGI’s in-depth reports
have covered more than 20 countries and 30 industries. Current research focuses on six
themes: productivity and growth, natural resources, labour markets, the evolution of global
financial markets, the economic impact of technology and innovation, and urbanisation.
Recent reports have assessed the digital economy, the impact of AI and automation on
employment, income inequality, the productivity puzzle, the economic benefits of tackling
gender inequality, a new era of global competition, Chinese innovation, and digital and
financial globalisation.
MGI is led by three McKinsey & Company senior partners: Jacques Bughin, Jonathan Woetzel,
and James Manyika, who also serves as the chairman of MGI. Michael Chui, Susan Lund, Anu
Madgavkar, Jan Mischke, Sree Ramaswamy, and Jaana Remes are MGI partners, and Mekala
Krishnan and Jeongmin Seong are MGI senior fellows.
Project teams are led by the MGI partners and a group of senior fellows and include
consultants from McKinsey offices around the world. These teams draw on McKinsey’s global
network of partners and industry and management experts. The MGI Council, which includes
leaders from McKinsey offices around the world and the firm’s sector practices, includes
Michael Birshan, Andrés Cadena, Sandrine Devillard, André Dua, Kweilin Ellingrud, Tarek
Elmasry, Katy George, Rajat Gupta, Eric Hazan, Acha Leke, Scott Nyquist, Gary Pinkus, Sven
Smit, Oliver Tonby, and Eckart Windhagen. In addition, leading economists, including Nobel
laureates, advise MGI research.
The partners of McKinsey fund MGI’s research; it is not commissioned by any business,
government, or other institution. For further information about MGI and to download reports,
please visit www.mckinsey.com/mgi.
McKinsey & Company in India
McKinsey & Company is a management consulting firm that helps leading corporations and
organisations make distinctive, lasting, and substantial improvements in their performance.
Over the past eight decades, the firm’s primary objective has remained constant: to serve as
an organisation’s most trusted external adviser on critical issues facing senior management.
With consultants deployed from more than 128 offices in 65 countries, McKinsey advises
companies on strategic, operational, organisational, and technological issues. The firm has
extensive experience in more than 20 major industry sectors and eight primary functional
practice areas as well as in-depth expertise in high-priority areas for today’s business
leaders. Across India, McKinsey & Company serves clients in the public and private sectors
from offices in Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai, and Bangalore. For more information on McKinsey
in India, please see www.mckinsey.com/Global_Locations/Asia/India.


India is establishing itself as a major presence in the digital economy. By any number of key
metrics, from internet connections to app downloads, both the volume and the growth of
its digital economy now exceed those of most other countries. Government and the private
sector are moving rapidly to spread high-speed connectivity across the country and provide
the hardware and services to put Indian consumers and businesses online. What does this
increased connectivity mean in economic terms? And how quickly and effectively will the
country be able to harness digital technologies for the prosperity of all Indians?
This report by the McKinsey Global Institute is the latest research in an ongoing series on the
impact of digital technologies on economies around the world. We build on our existing work
on digital’s potential and challenges in the United States, Europe, and some other economies
to probe how digital forces allow firms to connect, automate, and analyse—capabilities that will
enable them to reshape their value chains and increase productivity. In line with our “microtomacro” approach, we examine in depth four sectors in India—agriculture, healthcare, retail, and
logistics—that can benefit from taking digitisation to a new level.
This research is a joint venture between McKinsey & Company’s office in India and the McKinsey
Global Institute. It was led by three McKinsey & Company senior partners based in Mumbai—
Noshir Kaka, Alok Kshirsagar, and Rajat Gupta—along with Anu Madgavkar, an MGI partner in
Mumbai, who directed the project. James Manyika, MGI’s chairman, based in San Francisco, and
Kushe Bahl, a McKinsey partner in Mumbai, helped steer the effort. Kanika Gupta and Shishir
Gupta headed the research team, which was composed of Rishi Arora, Archit Maheshwari,
Chandan Kar, Ipshita Mandal, Preksha Mangal, Ketav Mehta, Ayush Mittal, TJ Radigan, Sailee
Rane, Himanshu Satija, Tanya Sharma, Maheep Singh, Shantanu Sinha, and Shivika Syal.
This project greatly benefited from a year-long research collaboration between McKinsey &
Company and the Government of India’s Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology
(MeitY) that culminated in the government’s report “India’s Trillion Dollar Digital Opportunity,”
released in February, 2019. We are especially grateful to Ravi Shankar Prasad, Honorable
Minister of Law and Justice and Electronics and Information Technology, Government of India,
Nandan Nilekani, co-founder and chairman of Infosys and former chairman of the Unique
Identification Authority of India, and Ajay Sawhney, union secretary, MeitY, for their guidance
and thought partnership.
We received many valuable insights through this research collaboration from Government of
India officials including Amitabh Kant, CEO of NITI Aayog; Dr. Rajiv Kumar, vice chairman of NITI
Aayog; and Aruna Sundararajan, union telecom secretary, Department of Telecommunication.
We are especially indebted to officials of MeitY and representatives of several other ministries
and departments, among them Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare; Commerce and Industry
(Government e Marketplace); Finance (DBT Mission); Health and Family Welfare; Higher
Education; Labour and Employment; Power; School Education and Literacy; and Skill
Development and Entrepreneurship.
We are grateful to business and industry leaders who interacted with us along with their teams
to provide input to our research: Bhavish Aggarwal, co-founder and CEO of Ola; Mukesh
Ambani, chairman and managing director of Reliance India Limited; Rajan Anandan, CEO of
Google India; N. Chandrasekaran, group chairman of Tata Sons; R. Chandrasekhar, former
president of NASSCOM; Deepak Garg, founder and CEO of Rivigo; Debjani Ghosh, president
of NASSCOM; Roopa Kudva, managing director of Omidyar Network India Advisors; Saurabh
Kumar, founder and CEO of Agricx Lab; Anant Maheshwari, president of Microsoft India; Sunita
Nadhamuni, director of technology at Dell EMC; Pradeep Parmeswaran, India head of Uber;
Siddharth Patodia, a co-founder of iGenetic Diagnostics; Kunal Prasad, co-founder and chief
operating officer of CropIn Technology Solutions; Rishad Premji, chairman of NASSCOM;
Aditya Puri, managing director of HDFC Bank; Vijay Shekhar Sharma, founder and CEO of
Paytm; Dr. Devi Shetty, chairman and executive director of Narayana Health; Vikram Shroff,
executive director of UPL; Aditya Singh, managing director of DaVita Care (India); Siddharth 
Tata, a co-founder of Purple Chilli; and Naveen Tewari, founder and CEO of InMobi. We also
thank representatives of several other business and industry organisations from whom we
obtained valuable insights, among them ABB, Amazon India, Apollo Hospitals, Axis Bank,
Bharti Enterprises, GE India, Hindustan Petroleum, Hindustan Unilever, ICICI Bank, Indian Oil,
Kotak Mahindra Bank, Larsen & Toubro, Mahindra Group, Piramal Enterprises, Siemens,
State Bank of India, and Vodafone.
Several experts from nonprofits, think tanks, and other institutions challenged our thinking,
and we are grateful to them, especially Dilip Asbe, managing director and CEO of National
Payments Corporation of India; Sanjay Jain, a fellow at the Indian Software Products Industry
Round Table (iSPIRT) and chief innovation officer of the Centre for Innovation Incubation and
Entrepreneurship at the Indian Institute of Management Ahmedabad; Lalitesh Katragadda,
technologist and architect of AP FiberNet; Nachiket Mor, India country director of the Bill &
Melinda Gates Foundation; Srikanth Nadhamuni, CEO of the eGovernments Foundation; Paresh
Parasnis, CEO of the Piramal Foundation; Samir Saran, president of the Observer Research
Foundation; and Sharad Sharma, governing council member and co-founder of iSPIRT.
Many McKinsey colleagues, based in India and outside, generously shared their time and
provided valuable insights. We are grateful to Chirag Adatia, Salil Aggarwal, Anubhav
Bhattacharjee, Sujit Chakrabarty, Bo Chen, Mahima Chugh, Nicolas Denis, David Fiocco,
K Ganesh, Raghav Gupta, Eric He, Daniel Hui, Kanika Kalra, Joshua Katz, Suyog Kotecha,
Ashok Kumar, Saurabh Kumar, Mehdi Lahrichi, Archana Maganti, Anne Martinez, Neelesh
Mundra, Nitika Nathani, James Naylor, Clayton O’Toole, Sudiptha Pal, RS Mallya Perdur,
Naveen Prashanth, Ankur Puri, Chandrika Rajagopalan, Florian Schaudel, Sameer Shetty,
Kunwar Singh, Shwaitang Singh, Marek Stepniak, Owen Stockdale, Renny Thomas, Jordan
VanLare, Sri Velamoor, Khiloni Westphely, and Hanish Yadav.
We are deeply indebted to our academic adviser, Rakesh Mohan, a senior fellow at the Jackson
Institute for Global Affairs at Yale University, who provided valuable feedback and guidance
throughout the research.
The report was edited and produced by MGI senior editor Mark A. Stein and editorial director
Peter Gumbel, production manager Julie Philpot, graphic design team leader Vineet Thakur,
senior graphic designers Marisa Carder, Pradeep Singh Rawat, and Patrick White, and graphic
artist Margo Shimasaki. Cathy Gui and Rebeca Robboy of MGI’s external communications team
helped disseminate and publicise the report, while Lauren Meling, MGI digital editor, aided with
digital and social media diffusion.
This report contributes to MGI’s mission to help business and policy leaders understand the
forces transforming the global economy, identify strategic locations, and prepare for the
next wave of growth. As with all MGI research, this research is independent and has not been
commissioned or sponsored in any way by any business, government, or other institution.
We welcome your comments at MGI@mckinsey.com.


In brief
Digital India:
Technology to transform
a connected nation
India’s digital surge is well under way on the consumer side,
even as its businesses show uneven adoption and a gap
opens between digital leaders and other firms. This report
examines the opportunities for India’s future digital growth
and the challenges that will need to be managed as it
continues to embrace the digital economy.
— India is one of the largest and fastest-growing markets for
digital consumers, with 560 million internet subscribers
in 2018, second only to China. Indian mobile data
users consume 8.3 gigabits (GB) of data each month
on average, compared with 5.5 GB for mobile users in
China and somewhere in the range of 8.0 to 8.5 GB in
South Korea, an advanced digital economy. Indians have
1.2 billion mobile phone subscriptions and downloaded
more than 12 billion apps in 2018. Our analysis of 17
mature and emerging economies finds India is digitising
faster than any other country in the study, save
Indonesia—and there is plenty of room to grow: just over
40 percent of
the populace has an internet subscription.
— The public and private sectors are both propelling digital
consumption growth. The government has enrolled more
than 1.2 billion Indians in its biometric digital identity
programme, Aadhaar, and brought more than 10 million
businesses onto a common digital platform through
a goods and services tax. Competitive offerings by
telecommunications firms have turbocharged internet
subscriptions and data consumption, which quadrupled
in both 2017 and 2018 and helped bridge a digital
divide; India’s lower-income states are growing faster
than higher-income ones in internet infrastructure and
subscriptions. Based on current trends, we estimate
that India will increase the number of internet users by
about 40 percent to between 750 million and 800 million
and double the number of smartphones to between
650 million and 700 million by 2023.
— Our survey of more than 600 firms shows that digital
adoption among businesses has been uneven across all
sectors. Digital leaders in the top quartile of adopters
are two to three times more likely to use software for
customer relationship management, enterprise resource
planning, or search engine optimisation than firms in the
bottom quartile and are almost 15 times more likely to
centralise digital management. Firm size is not always a
differentiator: while large firms are far ahead in digital areas
requiring large investments like making sales through
their own website, small businesses are leapfrogging
ahead of large ones in other areas, including acceptance
of digital payments and the use of social media and video
conferencing to reach and support customers.
— Digital applications could proliferate across most
sectors of India’s economy. By 2025, core digital sectors
such as IT and business process management, digital
communication services, and electronics manufacturing
could double their GDP level to $355 billion to
$435 billion. Newly digitising sectors, including
agriculture, education, energy, financial services,
healthcare, logistics, and retail, as well as government
services and labour markets, could each create $10 billion
to $150 billion of incremental economic value in 2025 as
digital applications in these sectors help raise output,
save costs and time, reduce fraud, and improve matching
of demand and supply.
— The productivity unlocked by the digital economy could
create 60 million to 65 million jobs by 2025, many of
them requiring functional digital skills, according to our
estimates. Retraining and redeployment will be essential
to help some 40 million to 45 million workers whose jobs
could be displaced or transformed.
— New digital ecosystems are already visible, reshaping
consumer-producer interactions in agriculture,
healthcare, retail, logistics, and other sectors.
Opportunities span such areas as data-driven lending and
insurance payouts in the farm sector to digital solutions
that map out the most efficient routes and monitor cargo
movements on India’s highways. In healthcare, patients
could turn to teleconsultations via digital voice or HD
video, and in retail, brick-and-mortar stores would find
value from being part of e-commerce platforms.
— All stakeholders will need to respond effectively if India
is to achieve its digital potential. Executives will need
to anticipate the digital forces that will disrupt their
businesses and invest in building capabilities, including
partnering with universities and outsourcing or acquiring
talent to deliver digital projects. Governments will need
to invest in digital infrastructure and public data that
organisations can leverage even as they put in place
strong privacy and security safeguards. Capturing the
gains of the digital economy will require more ease in
creating, scaling, and exiting startups as well as policies
to facilitate retraining and new-economy jobs for workers.
Individuals will need to inform themselves about how
the digital economy could affect them as workers and
consumers and prepare to capture its opportunities.
The MGI India Firm Digitisation Index shows digitally advanced rms
are pulling ahead of their peers.
Financial
services
70x 50x 30x
Agriculture Education Logistics Retail
$ 435bn
Growth potential
Potential value by 2025
(Index bottom quartile) (Index top quartile)
Executive summary
With more than half a billion internet subscribers, India is one of the largest and fastestgrowing markets for digital consumers, and the rapid growth has been propelled by public and
private sector alike. India’s lower-income states are bridging the digital divide, and the country
has the potential to be a truly connected nation by 2025. Much more growth is possible. As
India’s digital transformation unfolds, it could create significant economic value for consumers,
businesses, microenterprises, farmers, government, workers, and other stakeholders.
Digital adoption by India’s businesses has so far been uneven, but new digital business
models could proliferate across most sectors. We find that core digital sectors such as IT and
business process management (IT-BPM), digital communication services, and electronics
manufacturing could double their GDP level to $355 billion to $435 billion by 2025, while newly
digitising sectors (including agriculture, education, energy, financial services, healthcare,
logistics, and retail) as well as digital applications in government services and labour markets
could each create $10 billion to $150 billion of incremental economic value in the same
period. Some 60 million to 65 million jobs could be created by the productivity surge by 2025,
although redeployment will be essential to help the 40 million to 45 million workers whose jobs
will likely be displaced or transformed by digital technologies, based on our estimates.
In India’s new and emerging digital ecosystems of the future—already visible in areas such
as precision agriculture, digital logistics management, and digital healthcare consultations—
business will have to find a new way to engage with customers. All Indian stakeholders
will need to gear up to capture the opportunities and manage the challenges of being a
connected nation.
India’s digital leap is well under way, propelled by both public
and private-sector actions
By many measures, India is on its way to becoming a digitally advanced nation1
.Just over
40 percent of the populace has an internet subscription, but India is already home to one
of the world’s largest and most rapidly growing bases of digital consumers. It is digitising
activities at a faster pace than many mature and emerging economies.
India’s internet user base has grown rapidly in recent years, propelled by the decreasing cost
and increasing availability of smartphones and high-speed connectivity, and is now one of
the largest in the world (Exhibit E1). The country had 560 million subscribers in September
2018, second in the world only to China.2Digital services are growing in parallel. Indians now
download more apps—12.3 billion in 2018—than residents of any other country except China.3
The average Indian social media user spends 17 hours on the platforms each week, more than
social media users in China and the United States.4 The share of Indian adults with at least one
digital financial account has more than doubled since 2011, to 80 percent, thanks in large part
to the more than 332 million people who opened mobile phone–based accounts under the
government’s Jan-Dhan Yojana mass financial-inclusion programme.5
1 In February 2019, the Indian government released a report highlighting the considerable economic opportunities from
digital technologies and a detailed action plan for realizing them. India’s Trillion Dollar Digital Opportunity, Ministry of
Electronics and Information Technology, Government of India, February 2019. 2 Indian telecom services performance indicator report, June-September 2018, Telecom Regulatory Authority of India. 3 Priori Data, January 2019. 4 We Are Social, Digital in 2018: Southern Asia, January 2018. 5 Pradhan Mantri Jan-Dhan Yojana, November 20, 2018, pmjdy.gov.in/account; Asli Demirgüç-Kunt et al., The Global
Findex Database 2017: Measuring financial inclusion and the fintech revolution, World Bank, April 2018.
India’s digital divide is narrowing, and all states have much
room to grow
With both private and public-sector action promoting digital usage, India’s states have started
bridging the digital divide. Lower-income states are showing the fastest growth in internet
infrastructure, such as base tower stations and the penetration of internet services to new
customers. While low and moderate-income states as a group accounted for 43 percent of all
base tower stations in India in 2013, they accounted for 52 percent of the incremental towers
installed between 2013 and 2017.9 Low-income states like Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh,
and Jharkhand were among the five fastest-growing states in internet penetration between
2014 and 2018; Uttar Pradesh alone added more than 36 million internet subscribers in that
period. Ordinary Indians in many parts of the country—including small towns and rural areas—
can read the news online, order food delivery via a phone app, video chat with a friend (Indians
log 50 million video-calling minutes a day on WhatsApp), shop at a virtual retailer, send money
to a family member through their phone, or watch a movie streamed to a handheld device.
Even after these advances, India still has plenty of room to grow in digital terms. Just over
40 percent of the populace has an internet subscription.10 Despite the growth of digital
financial services, close to 90 percent of all retail transactions, by number, are still in cash.11
Only 5 percent of trade is transacted online, compared with 15 percent in China in 2015.12
Looking ahead, India’s digital consumers are poised for robust growth. By our estimates,
India could add as many as 350 million smartphones by 2023.
Indian businesses are digitising rapidly but not evenly
Against this backdrop of rapid consumer internet adoption, India’s businesses have a
relatively uneven pattern of digitisation. We surveyed more than 600 firms to determine
the level of digitisation as well as the underlying traits, activities, and mind-sets that drive
digitisation at the firm level. We used each company’s answers to score its level of digitisation
on a scale of 0 to 100 and created the MGI India Firm Digitisation Index. Companies in the top
quartile, which we characterise as digital leaders, had an average score of 58.2, while those in
the bottom quartile, the digital laggards, averaged 33.2. The median score was 46.2.
A higher score indicates a company uses digital more extensively in day-to-day operations
(such as implementing customer relationship management systems or accepting digital
payments) and in a more organised manner (for example, by having a separate analytics team
or centralised digital organisation) than companies with lower scores. Our survey found that, on
average, digital leader firms outscored other firms by 70 percent on strategy dimensions (for
example, responsiveness to disruption and investment in digital technologies), by 40 percent
on organisation dimensions (such as level of executive support and use of key performance
indicators), and by 31 percent on capability dimensions (including use of technologies such as
CRM and enterprise resource planning solutions, and adoption of digital payments).
Differences in digital adoption within sectors are greater than those across sectors.
While some sectors have more digitally sophisticated companies than others, top-quartile
companies can be found in all sectors—even those sometimes considered resistant to
technology, such as transportation and construction. Conversely, sectors such as information
and communications technology (ICT), professional services, and education and healthcare,
which have more digitised firms on average, are represented in the bottom quartile of
adoption (Exhibit E4).
Digital strategy: Leading digital companies in India adopt strategies that make them
stand out from their peers in several ways. They centre their strategies on digital, let
digital technologies shape how they engage with customers, and invest more heavily in
digital than their peers. These firms are 30 percent more likely than bottom-quartile firms
to say they fully integrate their digital and overall strategies, and 2.3 times more likely to
sell their products through e-commerce platforms. Top-quartile firms are 3.5 times more
likely than bottom-quartile firms to say that digital disruptions led them to change their
core operations. Digital leaders also make digital investment a priority. Top-quartile firms
are 5.5 times more likely than bottom-quartile firms to outspend their peers on digital
initiatives and 40 percent more likely to consider digital a top priority for investment.
Exhibit E5
India’s digital leaders still have ample room for improvement in many areas.
1 “Leaders” are firms scoring within the top quartile of MGI’s India Firm Digitisation Index. 2 Results of a survey conducted across 220 large firms in India with revenue of 5 billion rupees, or $70 million.
SOURCE: McKinsey India firm digitisation survey, May 2017; McKinsey Global Institute analysis
Exhibit 14
India’s digital leaders still have ample room for improvement in many areas
Source: McKinsey India rm digitisation survey, May 2017; McKinsey Global Institute analysis
1. “Leaders” are rms scoring within the top quartile of MGI’s India Firm Digitisation Index.
2. Results of a survey conducted across 220 large rms in India with revenue of 5 billion rupees, or $70 million.
% of rms responding
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
30
17
37 45
46
55
8 29
26 40
23
33
47
23 49
58
41 65
Strategy
Has a digital strategy that is fully integrated with the
overall strategy
Has changed core operations in response to
disruption
Believes they invest more in digital than peers do
Organisation
Has a centralised, company-wide digital
organisation
CEO supports and is directly involved in digital
initiatives
Has a distinct, stand-alone analytics team with the
appropriate talent
Capabilities
Uses the Uni ed Payments Inter-face (UPI) for
interbank transfers
Has implemented a Customer Relationship
Management system
Makes extensive use of digital channels to reach
customers
% of leaders not
reporting this attribute
% of digital leaders
reporting this attribute1
% of non-leader rms
reporting this attribute
42
71
60
53
51
35
55
45
54
8 Digital India: Technology to transform a connected nation
— Digital organisation: Many more digital leaders than laggards have a single business unit
that manages and coordinates digital initiatives for the entire company. Top-quartile firms
are 14.5 times more likely than bottom-quartile firms to centralise digital management,
and five times more likely to have a stand-alone, properly staffed analytics team. Topquartile firms are also 70 percent more likely than bottom-quartile firms to say their
CEO is “supportive and directly engaged” in digital initiatives.
— Digital capabilities: Top-quartile firms are 2.6 times more likely than bottom-quartile
firms to use customer relationship management software, for example, and 2.5 times
more likely to coordinate the management of their core business operations by using an
enterprise resource planning system. Digital leaders also optimise their digital marketing.
Our survey shows that top-quartile companies are 2.3 times more likely than bottomquartile firms to use search engine optimisation, and 2.7 times more likely to use social
media for marketing.
The gap between digital leaders and other firms is not insurmountable. In some cases, even
when the difference is large, companies may be able to begin closing it by digitising in small,
relatively simple ways. Social media marketing is a good example. Bottom-quartile firms
are 70 percent less likely than top-quartile businesses to use social media to attract and
serve new customers, and less than half as likely to use e-commerce or listing platforms.
However, these sales channels are cheap and easily accessible, and a business owner with
a smartphone and a high-speed internet connection will encounter few barriers to taking
advantage of them.
Small businesses are closing the digital gap with larger firms
and are ahead of them in accepting digital payments
Large companies (defined in our survey as having revenue greater than 5 billion rupees,
or about $70 million) have the financial resources and expertise to invest in some advanced
technologies, such as artificial intelligence and the Internet of Things, but growing high-speed
internet connectivity and shrinking data costs are opening digital opportunities for many
small-business owners and sole proprietors.
Indeed, our survey found that small businesses are ahead of large companies in accepting
digital payments. Among small firms, 94 percent said they accept payment by debit or
credit card, compared with only 79 percent of big firms; for digital wallets, the figures
were 78 percent versus 49 percent. Small companies also are more willing to use digital
technologies such as video conferencing and chat to support their customers.
Our survey found that 70 percent of small firms have built their own websites to reach clients,
compared with 82 percent of large firms, and are just about as likely as those big companies
to have optimised their websites for mobile devices. Small firms are less likely than big firms
to buy display ads on the web (37 percent versus 66 percent), but they are ahead of big
companies in connecting with customers via social media and are more likely to use search
engine optimisation. More than 60 percent of the small firms surveyed use LinkedIn to hire
talent, and about half say most of their employees need to have basic digital skills. While only
51 percent of smaller firms said they “extensively” sell goods and services via their websites
(compared with 73 percent of big businesses), small businesses use e-commerce platforms
and other digital sales channels just as much as large firms and are equally likely to receive
orders through digital channels such as WhatsApp.
Digital applications have potential to create significant economic
value for India but will require new skills and labour redeployment
Firms in India that innovate and digitise rapidly will be better placed to tap into a large
connected market of up to 700 million smartphones and about 800 million internet users
by 2023. In the context of rapidly improving technology capabilities and declining data
costs, technology-enabled business models could become omnipresent across sectors and
activities in India over the next decade. That will likely create significant economic value in
each of these sectors. At the same time, the nature of work will change and require new skills.
94%
Percentage of small
businesses accept debit
or credit card payments
700m
Number of estimated
smartphones in India
by 2023
Digital India: Technology to transform a connected nation 9
Core digital sectors could more than double in size by 2025, and
each of several newly digitising sectors could contribute $10 billion
to $150 billion of economic value
We consider economic impact across three types of sectors. First are core digital sectors,
such as IT-BPM; digital communication services, including telecom services; and electronics
manufacturing. Second are newly digitising sectors that are not traditionally considered
part of India’s digital economy but have the potential to innovate and adopt digital rapidly,
such as financial services, agriculture, healthcare, logistics, and retailing. Third are activities
related to government services and labour markets, which can be intermediated using digital
technologies in new ways.
India’s core digital sectors accounted for about $170 billion—or 7 percent—of GDP in
2017–18.13 This comprises value added from sectors that already provide digital products and
services at scale, such as IT-BPM ($115 billion), digital communication services ($45 billion),
and electronics manufacturing ($10 billion). We estimate that these sectors could grow
significantly faster than GDP, and their value-added contribution could range from $205 billion
to $250 billion for IT-BPM, $100 billion to $130 billion for electronics manufacturing, and
$50 billion to $55 billion for digital communication services, totalling between $355 billion and
$435 billion and accounting for 8 to 10 percent of India’s GDP in 2025.
Alongside these already digitised sectors and activities, India stands to create more value if
it succeeds in nurturing new and emerging digital ecosystems in sectors such as agriculture,
education, energy, financial services, healthcare, and logistics. The benefits of digital
applications to productivity and efficiency in each of these newly digitising sectors are
already visible. For example, in logistics, tracking vehicles in real time has enabled shippers to
reduce fleet turnaround time by 50 to 70 percent.14 Similarly, digitising supply chains allows
companies to reduce their inventory by up to 20 percent. Farmers can cut the cost of growing
rice by 15 to 20 percent using data on soil conditions that enables them to minimise the use of
fertilisers and other inputs.15
In cross-cutting areas such as government services and the markets for jobs and skills, digital
technologies can also create significant value. For example, shifting government transactions,
including subsidy transfers and procurement, online can enhance public-sector efficiency and
productivity, and creating online marketplaces that bring together workers and employers could
considerably improve the performance of India’s fragmented and largely informal job market.
Unlocking this value will require widespread adoption and implementation. The economic
value will be proportionate to the extent that digital processes permeate organisations and
their marketing and service delivery channels, shop floors, and supply chains. Our estimates
of potential economic value for each sector vary depending on adoption rates by 2025; for
example, in areas where the readiness of India’s firms and government agencies is low and
considerable effort will be required to catalyse broad digitisation, adoption may be as low as
20 percent. Where private-sector readiness is relatively high and government policy is already
supportive of large-scale digitisation, adoption could be as high as 80 percent.
13 Estimates based on industry revenue and cost structures and growth trends. 14 Who we are, Rivigo, rivigo.com. 15 Pinaki Mondal and Manisha Basu, “Adoption of precision agriculture technologies in India and in some developing
countries: Scope, present status and strategies”, Progress in Natural Science: Materials International, June 2009,
Volume 19, Issue 6.
10 Digital India: Technology to transform a connected nation
Box E2.
Our methodology for sizing economic value
Our research seeks to analyse and quantify the potential economic impact of digital
technology and applications in India over the coming years.
The core digital sectors we describe (IT-BPM, digital communication services, and
electronics manufacturing) are already considered part of India’s digital economy,
and their GDP contribution is measured based on conventional revenue, expense,
and value-added metrics.
Economic data are not available for technology-based business models and applications
in newly digitising sectors—such as agriculture, education, energy, financial services,
manufacturing, healthcare, logistics, and retail—because national income accounts do
not yet track them separately. For these areas, we create broad estimates of potential
economic value in the future. We use a value-impact approach to understand and estimate
the potential effect of digital adoption on productivity based on micro evidence from
sectors and firms. We identify discrete use cases and estimate their potential impact by
quantifying the productivity gains possible if they were to scale up and achieve moderate
to high levels of adoption. Productivity gains are estimated by measures such as greater
output using the same resources, cost savings, time savings, and new sources of capital
and labour that could become available with the implementation of digital technologies.
We do not estimate potential GDP impact because the accounting and marketisation of
productivity gains remain uncertain and hard to predict. For example, it is unclear whether
time saved will convert into productive and paying jobs, and whether new digital services
will generate consumer surplus accruing to users of technologies or paid products that
yield revenue to producers. Nevertheless, we believe these estimates provide a sense of
the order of magnitude of the impact that digitisation represents for an economy of the
scale and breadth of India’s.
All our estimates are in nominal dollars in 2025 and represent scope for economic value
creation in that year. They do not represent market revenue or profit pools for individual
players; rather, they are estimates of end-to-end value to the whole system.
Our estimates of economic value in 2025 represent potential; they are not a prediction.
The pace of India’s progress will depend on government policies and private-sector
action. Realising the economic value estimated would necessitate investment in digital
infrastructure and ecosystems, complementary investment in physical infrastructure
and productive capacities, and education and training of the workforce.
Productivity unlocked by digital applications could create up to
65 million jobs for Indians by 2025, but up to 45 million workers
will need retraining and redeployment
Prior MGI research on the effects of automation and other technologies on work has found
that while some jobs will be displaced, and others created, most occupations will change as
machines complement humans in the workplace.16 That in turn will require a new focus on
retraining. For India, we estimate that the new digital economy may render obsolete all or
parts of 40 million to 45 million existing jobs by 2025, particularly those in highly predictable,
nonphysical activities, such as the work of data-entry operators, bank tellers, clerks, and
insurance claims- and policy-processing staff. Consequently, many millions who currently
hold these jobs will need to be retrained and redeployed.
At the same time, heightened productivity and increased demand generated by digital
technology applications may create enough new jobs to offset that substitution and
employ more workers if the requisite training and investments are made. We estimate
that 60 million to 65 million could be created through the direct impact of productivityboosting digital applications.
New skills will be needed for jobs of the future
Jobs of the future will be more skill-intensive. The need for functional digital literacy will
increase across the board. For example, many more delivery workers will need to use apps
to navigate their way around the city, shop floor workers will need to understand and respond
to the output of precision control systems, farm advisory agents will need to read intelligent
apps on their tablets and discuss implications with farmers, and health workers will need to
learn how to extract and upload data into intelligent health management information systems.
Routine tasks like data processing will be increasingly automated.
Along with rising demand for skills in emerging digital technologies (such as the Internet
of Things, artificial intelligence, and 3-D printing), demand for higher cognitive, social,
and emotional skills, such as creativity, unstructured problem solving, teamwork, and
communication, will also increase. These are skills that machines, for now, are unable to
master. As the technology evolves and develops, individuals will need to constantly learn
and relearn marketable skills throughout their lifetime. India will need to create affordable
and effective education and training programs at scale, not just for new job market
entrants but also for midcareer workers.
Four sectors in which digital forces can have a transformative effect
To capture the potential economic value that we size at a macro level, businesses will
need to deliver digital technologies at a micro level: that is, use digital technologies to
fundamentally change the way individuals and businesses interact and perform day-to-day
activities. We examine the potential shifts in interactions between individuals and institutions
(predominantly businesses, although government agencies also play important roles in
many value chains). These interactions will shift because of three digital forces: those that
allow people to connect or collaborate, transact, and share information; those that enable
organisations to automate routine tasks to increase productivity; and those that provide
the tools for organisations to analyse data to make insights and improve decision making.
The interplay of these three forces will lead to the emergence of new data ecosystems in
virtually every business sector or domain, spurring new products, services, and channels,
and creating economic value for consumers as well as components of the ecosystem that
best adapt their business models.
16 See Jobs lost, jobs gained: Workforce transitions in a time of automation, McKinsey Global Institute, December 2017.
For this report, we used similar analysis with different time frames.
Exhibit E6
Digital technologies can create signicant economic value in India in 2025
Source: McKinsey Global Institute analysis
Others
...but India will need to
seize the opportunity.
Newly digitised sectors
show the biggest
growth potential...
Maxiumum potential
value
Reduced potential value
of digitisation due to
ineective policies
and/or low private
sector participation
IT business process mgmt. Financial services 3
Job and skills
Logistics
Digital comms services
Government e Marketplace
Education
Energy
Healthcare
Agriculture
Retail
Direct bene t transfer
Electronic manufacturing
Current
economic value
($ billions)
Maximum potential
value by 2025
($ billions)
Core digital
services
Newly digitising
sectors
Digital government & labour
markets
100%
Sector value potential ranked from highest (IT) to lowest (healthcare)
1 McKinsey Global Institute value estimates in each category are based on the
“value-impact approach” and focus on the potential eect of adoption of the
considered digital applications on productivity. Discrete use cases were identied
with their potential impact, in terms of greater output, time, or cost saved; these
estimates were multiplied by their adoption rates to create a macro picture of
potential economic gains for each application, scaled up for each sector.
All of our estimates are in nominal US dollars in 2025 and represent scope for
economic value creation in that year. They do not represent market revenue,or
prot pools for individual players; rather they are estimates of end-to-end value to
the system as a whole. Some of the economic value we size may or may not
materialise as GDP or on market-based exchanges.
Potential estimate of economic value from ow based lending, plus economic
value created through digital payments.
Excluding eects of business digitisation in nancial services, agriculture,
education, retail, logistics, energy, and healthcare, which are listed separately.
Potential estimate of economic value from precision agriculture, digital farmer
nancing and universal agricultural marketplace.
Potential estimate of economic value from online talent platforms.
Estimation for 2025 includes value addition from visual broadband services,
plus digital media and entertainment.
Potential estimate of economic value from e-commerce and digital supply chain.
For estimation purposes in the report, etail is considered for e-commerce. If
broader denition of e-commerce is used (etail + etravel), current value becomes
$5billion and future potential becomes $28 billion to $40 billion. This assumes
that etravel becomes 25 percent of broader e-commerce by 2025, consistent
with trend observed in China.
Potential estimate of economic value from ecient logistics and shared transport.
Potential estimate of economic value from digitally enabled power distribution
and smart grid with distributed generation.
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
115 <1 10 <1
<1 <1 45 <1
3 <1
5 <1
<1 <1
55 50
35
70
30 25 15
15 10
250 130 90
70
Job and skills
25x Government eMarketplace
Financial services
Logistics
Agriculture
Education
170x
50x
70x
30x
50%
170
1 2
5
8 9 10
6 7
12 Digital India: Technology to transform a connected nation
4
Business digitisation
(including manufacturing IoT)
Digital India: Technology to transform a connected nation 13
To highlight the kinds of business model changes that companies should envisage and
prepare for, we examine how the connect-automate-analyse trio can play out across four
sectors: agriculture, healthcare, retail, and logistics
Digital agriculture: More than 40 percent of India’s labour force works in agriculture, which
contributes about 18 percent of the country’s GDP.17 Farms are small, averaging a little more
than one hectare, and inefficient, with crop yields ranging from 50 to 90 percent of those
in Brazil, China, Russia, and other developing economies.18 Many factors contribute to this.
Indian farmers have a dearth of machinery and relatively little data on soil health, weather,
and other variables; according to the government’s online farmer advisory portal, about
50 percent of farmers’ queries pertain to weather-related information.19 Because of poor
logistics and warehousing, about $15 billion worth of agricultural produce went to waste
before reaching consumers in 2013.20
Digital technology can transform India’s agriculture ecosystem in several ways (Exhibit E7).
Online bank accounts can provide the income and spending data that farmers need to qualify
for cheaper credit from banks. Digital land-registry records could make crop insurance
available to more farmers. Precision agriculture—delivering real-time data to farmers’ mobile
phones to help them optimise fertiliser, pesticide, and other inputs—can increase yields by
15 percent or more.21 After harvest, farmers could use variants of online marketplaces for
agricultural produce to transact with a larger pool of potential buyers. One such platform, the
government’s electronic National Agriculture Market, or eNAM, is available in 585 locations
in 16 states and shows potential to increase prices realised by farmers by 15 percent.22
Combined, these and other digital technologies can help food production better keep pace
with population growth and add $50 billion to $65 billion of economic value in 2025.23
17 Our estimates based on official data sources including Report on fifth annual employment-unemployment survey
(2015–16), Ministry of Labour and Employment, Government of India; First advance estimates of national income
2018–19, Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation press release, January 7, 2019. 18 India’s technology opportunity: Transforming work, empowering people, McKinsey Global Institute, December 2014. 19 Kisan Call Centre dashboard, mKisan, Government of India. 20 Wastage of agricultural produce, Ministry of Food Processing Industries press release, August 9, 2016. 21 Digital transformation initiative: Unlocking $100 trillion for business and society from digital transformation,
World Economic Forum, January 2017; Rapid introduction and market development for urea deep placement
technology for lowland transplanted rice, International Fertilizer Development Centre, 2017. 22 Ramesh Chand, Doubling farmers’ income: Rationale, strategy, prospects and action plan, National Institution for
Transforming India policy paper number 1/2017, March 2017; eNAM, Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare,
Government of India, May 2018. 23 Ramesh Chand, Doubling farmers’ income: Rationale, strategy, prospects and action plan, National Institution
for Transforming India policy paper number 1/2017, March 2017

Digital healthcare: India has too few doctors, not enough hospital beds, and a declining
share of state spending on healthcare relative to GDP.24 While life expectancy has risen to
68.3 years from 37 in 1951, the county still ranks 125th globally.25 Indian women are three
times as likely to die in childbirth as women in Brazil, Russia, China, and South Africa—and ten
times as likely as women in the United States.26 India also trails other big emerging economies
in infant mortality, childhood nutrition, and other public health markers. India has the world’s
highest incidence of tuberculosis, the most cases of HIV/AIDS outside of Africa, and threefourths of all malaria cases in South and Southeast Asia. Indians are less likely to survive
breast cancer than people in China or the United States, and more likely to succumb to
heart attacks at an earlier age.
Digital solutions can help, not just in alleviating the demand-supply mismatch by freeing up
15 percent of the time of scarce healthcare professionals, but also in improving quality and
trust (Exhibit E8). Telemedicine lets doctors consult with patients over a digital voice or video
link rather in person; this could enable them to see more patients, thereby easing the doctor
shortage in rural areas. In trials and pilots, telemedicine cuts consultation costs by about
30 percent. If telemedicine replaced 30 to 40 percent of in-person outpatient consultations,
India could save up to $10 billion and improve care for the poor and those living in remote
areas. Consolidating individual patients’ lifelong medical history into an electronic health
record (EHR) can help healthcare providers make more accurate diagnoses and lower the
risk of medical errors. Once stripped of information that could identify patients, EHRs also
could reduce administrative costs and provide data for medical research. Some hospitals
in India already practice evidence-based care, using digital platforms to give doctors and
nurses access to the best recent research to supplement their clinical expertise. The Manipal
Hospitals chain of medical centres uses IBM Watson for Oncology, a cognitive computing
platform, to analyse cancer patients’ records and present oncologists with a range of
potential diagnoses and personalised treatment options.27
Digital retail: More than 80 percent of all retail outlets in India—most of them sole
proprietorships or mom-and-pop shops—operate in the cash-driven informal economy.
That compares with 55 percent of retailers in China and 35 percent in Brazil.28 Because a
large part of their trade happens in cash, owners of these businesses do not generate the
financial records needed to apply for a bank loan. That limits their growth potential and their
opportunity to acquire productivity-enhancing digital tools. Large retailers have their own
troubles. Their business models, based on manual store operations and high inventory levels,
are capital heavy. They tend to give little thought to customers’ in-store experience or longterm loyalty. In many cases, retailers’ marketing practices are outdated and ineffective,
and their prices are static regardless of inventory or demand
Digital solutions could reshape interactions among players in the value chain (Exhibit E9).
E-commerce can enable retailers to expand without resorting to the capital-intensive brickand-mortar model. Some do not even bother with their own website, instead relying on
third-party sites like Amazon, which offer large, ready pools of shoppers along with logistics,
inventory, and payment services as well as customer data analytics. Likewise, digital payments
automatically create financial records to establish the creditworthiness of both the store and
its customers, making access to formal finance easier. Digital marketing, through social media
or other means, can engage customers and build brand loyalty. We estimate that e-commerce
sales in India would grow faster than sales at brick-and-mortar outlets, allowing digital retail
to increase its share of trade from 5 percent currently to about 15 percent by 2025.
Digital logistics (including transportation): Economists forecast that India will add more
than $1 trillion of incremental GDP by 2022, one of only five economies globally to achieve
this feat.29 That would challenge the overburdened logistics network, which already suffers
from a fragmented trucking industry, inadequate railways infrastructure, and a shortage of
warehousing. India spends about 14 percent of GDP on logistics, compared with 12 percent
in South America, 9 percent in Europe, and 8 percent in the United States, according to
McKinsey estimates. High costs and low performance assume greater importance in light
of the government’s “Make in India” programme, which seeks to increase manufacturing’s
share of GDP from about 16 percent to 25 percent by 2022.
Digital transformation is likely even in this traditional, physical sector (Exhibit E10). To prevent
logistics from getting in the way, the government is creating a transactional e marketplace

the National Logistics Platform, to connect shipping agencies, logistics services, inland
container depots, container freight stations, banks, and insurance agencies with customs
authorities, seaport and airport officials, and railways managers.30 By creating a place where
stakeholders can share information and coordinate plans, the platform is intended to speed
deliveries, reduce inventory requirements, and smooth order processing.
Private logistics firms also are enlisting digital solutions to streamline operations.
These include moving freight booking online, automating customer service, installing tracking
devices to monitor truck and cargo movements and increase productivity, leveraging realtime weather and traffic data to map the most efficient routes, and equipping trucks with
internet-linked sensors that alert dispatchers when a vehicle needs maintenance. According
to McKinsey estimates, digital interventions that result in higher system efficiency and better
asset utilisation can reduce logistics cost by 15 to 25 percent
Implications for business, government, and individuals
For India to reap the full benefits of digitisation—and minimise the pain of transitioning to a
digital economy—business leaders, government officials, and individual citizens must play
distinct roles and work together.
Business leaders will need to assess how and where digital could disrupt their company and
industry and set priorities for how to adapt to the changing environment. Potential disruptions
and benefits may be particularly large in India because of its scale, the rapid pace of
digitisation, and its relatively low current productivity in many sectors. For firms to seize the
benefits of these digital changes, leaders will need to act quickly and decisively to adapt their
companies’ existing business models and to digitise internal operations. In this context, four
imperatives stand out.
First, companies will need to take smart risks in adapting current business models and
adopting new, disruptive ones. Only 46 percent of Indian firms in our survey reported having
a coordinated plan to change their long-term operations to react to large-scale disruption.
Second, digital should be front of mind as executives strategise. Customers are becoming
more digitally literate and have come to expect the convenience and speed of digital, whether
they are shopping online or questioning a billing irregularity, but many companies do not meet
their expectations. In our survey, 80 percent of firms cite digital as a “top priority”, but only
41 percent say their digital strategy is fully integrated with the company’s overall strategy.
Third, firms will need to invest in building digital capabilities quickly, especially hiring talent
needed to implement and accelerate digital transformation. That is especially challenging
in India because many of its most talented workers emigrate and rarely return. Companies
could partner with universities to recruit and develop talent, beginning with digital natives
who are currently enrolled or have recently finished their studies. Skills and capabilities that
need to be developed in this cohort include nonlinear and lateral thinking to go beyond welldefined processes and methodologies, a strong technology-first bias when solving business
problems, and an “open source mentality” that helps students stitch together multiple sources
of knowledge to solve problems. Companies will also need to build deeper understanding of
technology and capabilities at all levels of their organisations, including in the C-suite. Senior
executives will need to champion digital and advanced analytics initiatives across their firms.
Finally, firms will need to encourage agile, digital-first organisation. This may require a new
attitude that puts digital first, starting with a “test and learn” mind-set that encourages rapid
iteration and a high tolerance for failure and redeployment.
India’s government has done much to encourage digital progress, from clarifying regulations
to improving infrastructure to launching the Digital India initiative, an ambitious plan to double
the size of the country’s digital economy. However, much work remains to be done for India to
capture its full digital potential. Government can help by partnering with the private sector to
drive digitisation.
Most directly, national and state governments can foster digital growth by continuing to invest
in digital infrastructure and the digitisation of government operations. This helps by providing
a market for digital solutions, which generates revenue for providers and encourages startups,
by expanding access to high-speed internet connectivity, and by giving people more reasons
to sign on—whether to receive a cooking-gas subsidy or register the purchase of property.
Government can help further in at least three ways: by creating and administering public data
sources that public and private organisations can leverage to improve products and services
and even create new ones; by fostering a regulatory environment that supports digital
adoption while also protecting citizens’ privacy; and by facilitating the evolution of labour
markets in industries disrupted by automation.
20 Digital India: Technology to transform a connected nation
Individual Indians are already reaping the benefits of digitisation as consumers, but they
will need to be cognisant that its disruptive powers can affect their lives and work in other
fundamental ways, too. As workers in an environment impacted by digital technologies,
individuals will need to be aware of how their work may change and what skills they will
need to thrive in the future, as well as looking for opportunities to capture the benefits of
a new digital-led economy and workplace. Individuals will also need to become stewards
of their personal data and sceptical consumers of information.
Preparation can start with awareness of industry innovations and disruptive technologies
and with learning how they might affect competing firms and the people who work for them.
Preparing for change may involve becoming comfortable with basic digital tools such as
mobile phones and the internet, acquiring additional skills in a worker’s current industry,
or training for a new line of work.
Workers can also get ahead by building an online presence: as employers increasingly post
and fill positions online, it is essential for job hunters to create a personal profile on one or more
platform. Thousands of Indians are already using digital technologies to become their own boss;
India accounts for 21.5 percent of workers signed up to online outsourcing sites worldwide,
second only to the United States. When they are engaged full time, these online outsourcing
workers frequently earn as much as or more than Indians in conventional employment.
India’s digital advances over the past few years have gained momentum as both the public
and private sectors have propelled the country into the forefront of the world’s consumers of
internet and digital applications. Indian business, too, has embraced digital, albeit unevenly,
with adoption varying widely among companies and sectors. Navigating the emerging digital
landscape is not easy, but it is one of the golden keys to India’s future growth and prosperity.
Unlocking the opportunities will be a challenge for the government, for businesses large and
small, and for individual Indians across the subcontinent, and some pain will accompany the
gains. But if India can continue its digital growth trajectory and accelerate further, the rewards
will be palpable to millions of businesses and hundreds of millions of citizens.

India is digitising rapidly. An average mobile data user currently consumes more than 8 GB
of data per month, which exceeds the average in more digitally advanced countries such
as China and South Korea; India’s average data usage a year ago was just 15 percent of
South Korea’s and 50 percent of China’s.31 It has the second-largest number of internet
users in the world—more than 550 million—and we estimate that this figure could exceed
800 million by 2023, driven by the increasing availability and decreasing cost of high-speed
connectivity and smartphones. The government’s Digital India initiative is bringing broadband
internet access to 250,000 gram panchayats, or self-governing village councils, to make it
easier for millions more people to connect online.32 Private telecommunications companies
are offering attractive packages, providing bundled near-free smartphones and voice
plans to anyone who subscribes to their internet services. Such public and private efforts to
turbocharge digital adoption have boosted usage: on average, Indians used more than 54
times as much data in 2018 as they did in mid-2016.33
Some of India’s digital potential stems from its previous reticence about adopting technology;
it is a big country growing on a small base. E-commerce revenue is soaring, yet only 5 percent
of trade is online, compared with 15 percent in China.34 The number of internet subscribers
is in the hundreds of millions, but only about 40 percent of the populace.35 And despite the
growth of digital wallets and other e-payment options, 90 percent of all retail transactions in
India are still made with cash.36 In other words, even as its digital consumer numbers grow,
India has plenty of room to continue increasing both the number of internet subscribers and
the users of a range of digital services.
India has accelerated the digitisation of its economy 

India has accelerated the digitisation of its economy and society
India has raised its profile among technologically advanced countries, not just in the
sheer size of its market and its potential, as highlighted by the number of subscribers to
digital services, but also the pace of its digitisation over the last three to four years.
By several measures of digital adoption, India is already among the global leaders (Exhibit 1).
Its Aadhaar programme, which can digitally verify the identities of 1.2 billion people, is the
world’s largest biometric identification system. India also has the second-largest mobile
subscription base, with nearly 1.2 billion subscribers, and the second-largest internet
subscription base, with 560 million subscribers.
31 Ministry of Science and ICT, Republic of Korea; Ministry of Industry and Information Technology, People’s Republic
of China; and Telecom Regulatory Authority of India, September 2018. 32 For details of the government’s action plan for digital, see India’s Trillion Dollar Digital Opportunity, Ministry of Electronics
and Information Technology, Government of India, February 2019. 33 Indian telecom services performance indicators, Telecom Regulatory Authority of India, June 2016 and September 2018. 34 China number is for 2015, Euromonitor International Retailing Edition 2019. 35 Indian telecom services performance indicators, Telecom Regulatory Authority of India, September 2018. 36 “Digital payments in India to reach $1 trillion by 2023: Credit Suisse”, Economic Times, February 15, 2018.
1.2 billion
Number of Indians enrolled in Aadhaar,
the world’s largest digital ID programme
Digital India: Technology to transform a connected nation 2


On a micro scale, individual Indians are making digital part of their lives. They download
more apps—12.3 billion in 2018—than residents of any other country except China.37 About
294 million Indians use social media, and the average Indian social media user spends
17 hours on the platforms each week, more than social media users in either China or the
United States.38 On average, Indians consume 8.3 gigabytes (GB) of data every month,
compared with about 5.5 GB by the typical Chinese consumer.39
India is one of the world’s fastest-digitising countries but has plenty
of room for growth
To gauge India’s relative position, we analysed 30 dimensions of digital adoption in 17 mature
and emerging digital economies—including Brazil, China, Indonesia, Russia, South Korea,
Sweden, and the United States. The 30 metrics cover three aspects of adoption: digital
foundation (such as the cost, speed, and reliability of internet connections); digital reach
(the number of mobile devices, app downloads, and data consumption); and digital value
(the extent of digital user engagement in texting, tweeting, shopping, and streaming).
Across these dimensions, we found that India is digitising faster than all but one other
country in the study, Indonesia.
The analysis, summarised in the Country Digital Adoption Index, concluded that India’s digital
adoption level rose by 90 percent between 2014 and 2017 (Exhibit 2).40 India’s rate of growth
is high across all dimensions of the index, but greatest in the digital foundation section.
This was helped by Aadhaar enrolment, which has more than doubled since 2014. Other
improvements include the quadrupling of average fixed-line download speed, and the lower
price of mobile data.41


India’s position in the index also was helped by the fact that more than 210 million Indians
joined the global network of internet users between 2013 and 2017, almost doubling the
total national penetration rate.43 India added more than 240 million smartphone users over
that period, more than quadrupling the smartphone penetration rate, from 5.5 phones per
100 people in 2013 to 22.2 phones in 2017.44 The number of digital payment transactions,
including those involving digital wallets, internet banking, and credit or debit card transactions
at points of sale, reached 15.3 billion in 2017–18, up from 2.5 billion in 2013–14.45
India’s growth momentum on digital adoption should be viewed in the context of a low base.
To maintain its momentum, the country would need to maintain this trajectory and improve
on it where possible.
Innovation in the public and private sectors has been essential
in driving digital adoption
Two factors have been primarily responsible for India’s accelerating pace of digital adoption:
the government’s dedication to digitising key aspects of the economy, and the private sector’s
innovation and investment to promote broader internet access and increased use. In many
areas where digital adoption has been quickest, these combined public and private influences
are clear to see (Exhibit 3).
Public-sector programmes have laid a solid foundation for private
digital innovation
The government accelerated the national digitisation process by building a foundation of
digital infrastructure and public platforms—scalable databases and websites—and then
introducing digital applications and services. These created real incentives for citizens to
go online (see Box 1, “An overview of the Digital India programme”).
Government measures included the rapid ramp-up of Aadhaar, the national biometric
digital identity programme, and its subsequent linkage to the payment of welfare benefits.
Over 1.2 billion Indians now have Aadhaar digital identities, up from 510 million in 2013;
nearly 870 million bank accounts were linked to Aadhaar by February 2018, compared with
399 million in April 2017 and 56 million in January 2014.46
A suite of open application program interfaces (APIs) linked to Aadhaar—such as the Unified
Payments Interface and Bharat Interface for Money/Bharat QR code for payments, eKYC for
electronic verification of customers’ identities, and DigiLocker for online document storage—
makes up a large part of India’s digital foundation and has propelled the country’s digital
evolution. The open-source Unified Payments Interface platform, for example, integrates
other payment platforms in a single mobile app that enables quick, easy, and inexpensive
payments for individuals, businesses, and government agencies.47 DigiLocker permits
users to issue and verify digital documents, obviating the need for paper.48
43 Indian telecom services performance indicators, Telecom Regulato


Separately, the introduction of the Goods and Services Tax Network, which brings all
transactions by about 10.3 million indirect taxpaying businesses onto one digital platform,
and the digitisation of records at the Ministry of Corporate Affairs are emerging as powerful
platforms. Authorised users can make digital tax payments through them, research corporate
digital identity and verification, and conduct real-time credit evaluations based on revenue
reported through the tax network.49
The government also triggered a growth spike in digital payments through the launch, in 2014,
of the Pradhan Mantri Jan-Dhan Yojana, the national financial-inclusion drive, which led
millions of people to open Aadhaar-authenticated bank accounts linked to mobile phones.
Indians have opened 337 million Jan-Dhan accounts, a threefold jump in four years.50 One
of the effects of the government’s move to demonetise high-denomination currency notes
in November 2016 was to remove many legal and regulatory barriers to digital payments.
Private-sector competition has helped bring down digital costs,
thereby boosting usage
One consequence of the competition and growing private-sector service offerings is that
data costs in India have plummeted by more than 95 percent since 2013, providing a major
impetus for continued growth in internet access and usage. The average Indian customer
in September 2018 used more than 92 times as much data, 8,320 MB, as in 2014, when the
monthly average was just 89 MB. In several digitally advanced countries, including the United
States and China, data costs dipped below 1 percent of monthly income years ago, triggering
comparably large jumps in data consumption. India reached this point in 2017, and as a result
data consumption quadrupled from 2016 to 2017 (Exhibit 4).
Consequently, the price of data is no longer a constraint on India’s ability to adopt digital
channels for increasingly data-intensive services like remote teleconsultation, e-learning
modules, and movie or other entertainment streaming. India’s relatively low level of fixed
broadband penetration (1.4 subscriptions per 100 people versus 42.4 in the United Kingdom)
makes mobile internet relatively more valuable for consumers who often cannot access the
internet in other ways. This should lead to further increases in mobile-driven online activity
in the coming years


An overview of the Digital India programme
The national government introduced Digital India in July 2015, launching projects in each
of the following areas to transform how Indians communicate, work, save, and spend:1
— Broadband highway: Provide broadband connectivity in rural areas via optical-fibre
cable to gram panchayats; more than 110,000 have been linked so far.2 Improve
connectivity in urban areas by adding service providers and solving right-of-way
issues. Install broadband and cloud services to government departments up to the
panchayat level.
— Universal mobile connectivity: Expand mobile coverage to generate demand for
mobile services in rural areas and attract private-sector telecoms and internet service
providers. Mobile services already cover 554,530 of the country’s 597,608 villages.3
— Public internet access: Offer public internet access at Common Services Centres and
post offices. Currently, service is available at almost 300,000 of the country’s 546,286
CSCs, which are physical facilities for delivering government of India e-services to rural
and remote locations where availability of computers and Internet used to be negligible
or mostly absent. About 800 CSCs offer Wi-Fi.4
— E-governance: Re-engineer government to improve service and efficiency. Examples
include Aadhaar, e-visa, and e-procurement. The central government published
926,070 electronic tenders in 2017–18, up from 476,983 in 2014–15.5
— E-Kranti—electronic delivery of services: Deliver government services digitally to
improve efficiency, transparency, and reliability. Progress has been made on 33 of
e-Kranti’s 44 “mission mode projects”—high-priority e-governance tasks with clearly
defined objectives and measurable outcomes.6
— Information for all: Increase access to government information, starting with the open
data platform data.gov.in. Currently, around 255,004 documents, data sets, and other
resources are available on the site.7 Another platform, MyGov.in, facilitates citizen
engagement with government.
— Electronics manufacturing: Promote electronics manufacturing in India, with the
target of net zero imports by 2020. After the duty on imports of mobile components
was more than halved, domestic mobile handset manufacturing output increased from
60 million units in 2014–15 to 225 million in 2017–18.8
— IT for jobs: Teach young people the skills needed for IT and IT-enabled jobs. The
government has launched several initiatives, but greater scale is required to meet
industry needs. Training institutes, higher education institutes, and industry could
collaborate on the best approach.
— Early harvest: Implement quick-turnaround projects to illustrate digitisation’s benefits.
Examples include a biometric system to track the attendance of 901,713 central
government employees, secure government email, a national portal for lost children,
and conversion of schoolbooks to e-books.9
1 Digital India, May 1, 2018. 2 Aman Sharma, “BharatNet has a new target: Connect every village home”, Economic Times, May 17, 2018; “1.10 lakh
gram panchayats given optical fibre connectivity: government”, Economic Times, February 9, 2018. 3 “Over 43,000 villages in India without mobile services: Telecom minister”, Economic Times, August 1, 2018. 4 National monthly progress report, Common Services Centres Scheme, April 2018. 5 Central Public Procurement Portal, January 2019. 6 National e-Governance Division, Digital India, May 3, 2018. 7 Mygov.in, January 3, 2019. 8 “Mobile phones to get cheaper as government eases import duty”, Hindu BusinessLine, May 6, 2016; MeitY, March 31,
2018. 9 Biometric attendance system, May 21, 2018, attendance.gov.i


Private-sector players have raced to provide services tailored
to the Indian market
The size of India’s market is spurring global technology giants such as Google, Facebook,
Microsoft, and Netflix to create services tailored to India’s consumers. Netflix, for example,
reportedly plans to spend roughly $300 million on India-focused content for its streaming
service.51 Amazon in 2016 introduced Tatkal, a streamlined registration process that aims to
enable India’s small and medium-size enterprises to set up shop on Amazon’s platform in under
60 minutes.52 Google’s Android launched the Android One series of low-cost phones and is
working with Reliance Jio on a smartphone that would retail for around $30. Facebook, in
partnership with the mobile service provider Airtel, is building 20,000 Express Wi-Fi hotspots.53
Local language content and interfaces will be important catalysts for growth in internet
usage in a country where the constitution lists 22 scheduled, or official, languages. Digital
applications will need to support local languages to succeed in India. One study found that, in
2016, the number of people using an Indian language on the internet surpassed the number of
Indians who use English on the web. Their number rose at a compound annual growth rate of
41 percent between 2011 and 2016, when it reached 234 million users.54 And that trend shows
no sign of slowing: nine out of ten new internet subscribers in India do not speak English
and will consume vernacular content.55 Facebook in India supports 12 local languages, and
WhatsApp supports 11 local languages. However, more needs to be done. For example, less
than 1 percent of all websites in India are in local languages, compared with 6.0 percent in
Russia and 3.4 percent in Japan.56
Private-sector innovation has propelled growth in India’s e-commerce industry. In 2017, India
had 176.8 million e-commerce users and $20 billion in consumer e-commerce sales.57 Amazon,
Flipkart, and others have used innovative sales and logistics models to grow fast. Amazon
offers more than 160 million products from more than 300,000 sellers in India and delivers
to 97 percent of serviceable postal codes, with 75 percent of new customers in nonmetro
locations.58 Flipkart has registered more than 100,000 sellers and promises new sellers they
can register and have their products online and for sale within 15 minutes. Both online


Financial technology innovation has grown rapidly. One survey ranked India second in the
strength of the fintech movement, with 77 percent of consumers saying they use at least one
nontraditional firm for financial services.60 Some are reaching huge scale: Alibaba-backed
Paytm, India’s largest mobile payments and commerce platform, has more than 300 million
registered mobile wallet users and six million merchants.61 Other players are also growing
rapidly. Freecharge, with over 54 million wallet customers, handled 500 million transactions
in June 2017.62
Indian businesses also have embraced the cloud. India’s public cloud market was estimated 
at $2.6 billion in 2018 and forecasted to grow to more than $4 billion by 2020.63 About
90 percent of India’s top chief information officers said their companies are either already
actively using cloud technologies or plan to do so within the next year. More than 120,000
firms in India already are customers of a single cloud storage business, Amazon Web Services.
India’s universal banks have also driven significant digital innovation across the spectrum of
financial services, and their regulator, the Reserve Bank of India, recently outlined possible
steps for the adoption of blockchain technologies in the financial sector.64
Increased digital access has begun to bridge the gap between
rich and poor states and affect lives in profound ways
Digital penetration and GDP per capita are strongly correlated. States in the top third of GDP
per capita levels, such as Haryana, Maharashtra, and Tamil Nadu, together with the small,
highly urbanised states and union territories of Chandigarh, Delhi, and Goa, have the highest
internet penetration, ranging between 28 percent in Uttarakhand to more than 170 percent
in Delhi. Similarly, states in the bottom third of GDP per capita, such as Bihar, Jharkhand,
Madhya Pradesh, and Uttar Pradesh, are among states with the lowest penetration rates:
22 percent in Bihar, for example, and 22 percent in Jharkhand.65
Nonetheless, given widespread adoption, Indian states are bridging the digital gap.
In several areas, including the installation of infrastructure like base transceiver stations
and penetration of internet services, the relatively lower-income states are growing the
fastest (Exhibit 5). For example, low- and moderate-income states as a group accounted
for 43 percent of all base transceiver stations in India in 2013; these states accounted for
52 percent of the incremental towers installed between 2013 and 2017.66 Likewise, these two
cohorts of states accounted for 43 percent of all internet subscribers in 2013 and 52 percent
in the incremental share added between 2014 and 2018.
A state-level analysis reveals that all states have grown their internet subscriber bases by a
minimum of 12 percent annually between 2014 and 2018, while states with relatively lower
internet penetration rates to begin with, such as Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, and Bihar,
have grown their subscriber bases distinctly faster, at 24 to 26 percent over the same period.
(Exhibit 6).


Digital applications are affecting the individual lives
of ordinary Indians
We already see evidence of how digital technologies are changing the way many average
Indians save, spend, communicate, earn their livings, and communicate with their families.
Millions of Indians, especially in big cities, now routinely interact with the world digitally as
part of their normal routines. They can, for example, read the news online, request a ride
share on their smartphone, order lunch delivery via a phone app, video chat with a friend
(Indians log 50 million video-calling minutes a day on WhatsApp), shop at a virtual retailer, pay
a bill from their digital wallet, take a course over the internet, or watch a movie streamed to a
tablet before nodding off for the night (Exhibit 7). Consumers can access financial accounts
and borrow money easily by using online interfaces rather than having to visit a distant bank
branch. Online shoppers enjoy not only much more convenience but also greater choice.
Consumers in smaller cities, who do not have retail choices comparable to those of large
metro areas, account for more than half of new e-commerce purchases in India.67

Millions of poor and rural Indians have benefited from the spread of mobile phone
technology and high-speed digital connectivity. Combined with Aadhaar-enabled targeting
of beneficiaries, government welfare payments now flow directly into beneficiaries’ bank
accounts. Beneficiaries can access the money through a network of banking correspondents
who carry micro-ATMs to dispense cash and accept deposits, without losing part of the
payments to theft or extortion by the middlemen who used to distribute cash from the
government. Electronic transfers of government benefits to consumers’ bank accounts grew
more than 26-fold between fiscal year 2014 and fiscal year 2018, and Aadhaar-based microATM transactions grew tenfold in value from fiscal 2017 to fiscal 2018.68 Similarly, millions of
rural homemakers living below the poverty line have received cooking-gas subsidies directly
into their bank accounts by proving their identity with Aadhaar.
A recent ruling by India’s highest court has limited the use of Aadhaar-enabled eKYC—
electronic know-your-customer anti-money-laundering solutions—to verify identities by
private-sector entities including banks, fintech companies, and telecom players. Companies
are developing and testing ways to verify ID electronically that comply with the judgement,
even as advocates pursue legal amendments to allow Aadhaar-enabled eKYC on a voluntary
basis. These solutions will be important for millions of people, including those on the move
without permanent addresses—for example, migrant workers could activate a new mobile
connection in minutes rather than days using Aadhaar eKYC, and will need new forms of
Aadhaar-based solutions to enable this convenience. This will make it easier for them to video
chat with their families and inexpensively send money home, while also giving them access
to music, news, and video content in their primary language.
The wave of digital transformation has also empowered women in India by helping them find
gainful employment, one area where they lag behind women in peer countries. For example,
54,800 women have become village-level entrepreneurs at government-run Common Service
Centres, providing digital services to the local population.69 In fiscal 2016, the Babajob portal
recorded a sevenfold increase in openings for female cab drivers and an increase of more than
150 percent in women’s applications for driver jobs.70 The business process outsourcing (BPO)
industry in India employs approximately 4 million workers, about 30 percent of them women.71
A three-year awareness programme in rural India on opportunities in the BPO industry
enhanced women’s enrolment in training programmes and increased school enrolment
among girls by three to five percentage points.72
The government is also already using technology to issue health advisories. For example,
Kilkari, an application that delivers free weekly audio messages on pregnancy, family planning,
nutrition, childbirth, and maternal and child care, already has racked up more than 60 million
calls.73 The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare designed a doctor-on-call service, the
National Health Helpline, which makes 500 qualified doctors available free to citizens at all
hours, every day of the year.74 The government also has introduced the National Health Portal
to provide information in six languages using a mobile app and a toll-free number; more than
2.6 million people have used the web portal, and 2.2 million have called the number.75
India’s digital footprint has significant room to grow
India’s digital story is still in its infancy. Significant gains have been made, but more are likely to
come, especially in the next five to ten years. For example, while the number of smartphones
per 100 people in India more than quadrupled from 2014 to 2018, rising from 5.5 to 26.2, the
world leader, Sweden, has 95.8 smartphones per 100 people.76 And while the average mobile
download speed in India jumped from 1.3 megabits per second in 2014 to 9.9 Mbps in 2018,

India is on a fast track to adopt key digital attributes, and the number of smartphones and
internet subscriptions could continue to increase rapidly in the next five years. We estimate
that India could add as many as 350 million smartphones, more than doubling its absolute level.
Just as data costs have fallen sharply and sparked a sharp increase in usage, smartphone
penetration has grown rapidly as average prices have fallen. Average smartphone prices
dropped from the level of 25 percent of GDP per capita in 2007 to 8 percent in 2014 and have
remained relatively stable since then. Smartphone penetration, in response, has increased
from 8 percent to 26 percent between 2014 and 2018, when prices bottomed out.
The experience of more digitally advanced nations and peer developing nations suggests that
further growth in smartphone ownership is likely in the coming four to five years. The United
States was comparable to India’s current 26 percent penetration rate in 2010 and went on
to exceed 50 percent penetration in the four years that followed. Likewise, Brazil and China
each passed 20 percent in 2012, going on to achieve 52 percent and 71 percent penetration,
respectively, in the following four years. If India replicates this trend, its smartphone
penetration rate could jump from 26 percent to more than 50 percent by 2023, adding close
to 350 million smartphone devices.
A bottom-up scenario suggests the potential for India’s internet subscriber base to reach
835 million by 2023. For this analysis, we looked at how cohorts of India’s states, classified
based on income levels, compare in penetration of base transceiver stations and internet
subscribers in 2017–18, and estimate growth based on a few assumptions. For example,
we assume the two bottom cohorts will reach the internet penetration rates of the next
higher cohort over a five-year period; in the high-income states, we assume the internet
penetration rate would plateau at 80 internet subscriptions per 100 people (the rate in
advanced economies), and the “very high income” group will maintain its current level of
penetration of 162 internet subscriptions per 100 people. Based on these assumptions, India
has the potential to add about 275 million internet subscribers by 2023, to reach a total of
just over 835 million subscribers. Similar assumptions about each cohort matching the base
transceiver station penetration rate of the next higher cohort suggest India could add about
1.5 million stations by 2023 (Exhibit 9).
India set out on its digital journey with the goal of transforming itself over a decade into a
digitally empowered society and knowledge-based economy that would improve the lives of
all citizens. Three and a half years into the Digital India initiative, the country has laid a solid
foundation by extending broadband digital access beyond cities and deeply into rural areas. 


Against the backdrop of rapid digital adoption by India’s consumers, India’s business
community is digitising unevenly. Some knowledge-intensive sectors such as information
and communications technology (ICT) and financial services are making rapid progress, while
many labour-intensive sectors such as trade and manufacturing are lagging behind. Within
each sector, levels of digitisation also vary widely. At least a few firms in every sector have
pulled ahead of their peers to attain robust levels of digitisation, while others have room to
catch up. In this chapter, we discuss the findings of an in-depth survey of 664 large and small
Indian companies we conducted to determine the level of digitisation within the firms as well
as the underlying traits, activities, and mind-sets that are driving digitisation at a firm level.
We used this survey to compile the MGI India Firm Digitisation Index, which highlights the ways
in which some companies, both large and small, are pulling ahead of their competitors—and
what the laggards need to do to catch up.
Our survey shows that digital leaders have important traits in common
In search of common traits and themes among digital leaders, we asked each of the 664 firms
in our India Firm Digitisation Survey about their digital strategy, digital organisation, and digital
capabilities (see Box 2, “Methodology for our survey of 664 Indian firms”)

The India Firm Digitisation Survey consisted of 50 questions about digital practices.
Two hundred twenty large firms (with revenue of more than 5 billion rupees, or $70 million)
and 444 small firms (with revenue of less than 5 billion rupees) provided answers across
a range of dimensions (Exhibit 10).
To assess their strategies, we asked about their responsiveness to competition, how well
their digital strategies align with their broader business strategies, and the extent of their
investment in digital technology.
To gauge organisational support for digital, we probed managers’ views on the subject,
reviewed the organisation of each firm’s data structure, and gauged how strictly
executives monitored key performance indicators for their digital strategy.
To measure a company’s digital capabilities, we gathered information on IT architecture
and automation, and then inquired about digital marketing, sales channels, and payments,
and how data drives tactical or strategic decisions. We used each firm’s answers to score
its level of digitisation—its digital index—and then created the MGI India Firm Digitisation
Index to rank the firms. It should be noted that the index reflects self-reported scores
from companies rather than objective criteri


The survey-based index highlights a large difference between the most and least digitised
respondents. Businesses with the strongest alignment in digital strategy and organisational
readiness for digital adoption have scores close to 70. The lowest-ranked company is nearer
to 10. Rather than focus on these outliers, we split the 664 companies surveyed into four
groups based on their scores; a significant gap remained. Companies in the top quartile,
which we characterise as digital leaders, had an average score of 58.2, while those in the
bottom quartile, the digital laggards, averaged 33.2 (Exhibit 11). The median score was 46.2.
A higher score indicates the company is using digital in its day-to-day operations more
extensively (such as implementing CRM or accepting digital payments) and in a more organised
manner (such as having a separate analytics team or a centralised digital organisation) than
companies with lower scores. Our survey found that, on average, digital leader firms outscored
non-leader firms by 70 percent on strategy dimensions (for example, their responsiveness
to disruption and investment in digital technologies); 40 percent on organisation dimensions
(including level of executive support and use of key performance indicators); and 31 percent on
capability dimensions (such as the use of customer relationship manageme

Seven traits of effective digital leaders
If sector and size do not explain digital leaders, what does? Our survey found that digital
leaders share at least seven traits across the dimensions measured in our survey, three
relating to digital strategy and two each in digital organisation and digital capabilities.
— Digital strategy: Leading companies adopt strategies that cause them to stand out from
their peers in several ways. They centre their strategies on digital, let digital technologies
shape how they engage with their customers, and invest more heavily in digital than their
peers. Top-quartile firms are 30 percent more likely than bottom-quartile firms to say they
fully integrate their digital and overall strategies. They are 2.3 times more likely to sell their
products through e-commerce platforms. Digital leaders also are more adaptive to unexpected circumstances. They are much
more likely to have proactive strategies to deal with digital disruptions; leaders are about
60 percent more likely than laggard firms to plan for a disruption to their supply chains
or products and services, and about 3.5 times more likely to prepare for a disruption to
their operations or distribution channels. Top-quartile firms are 3.5 times more likely
than bottom-quartile firms to say that digital disruptions led them to change their core
operations. Indeed, this is a particularly distinctive trait of digital leaders: 53 percent of
firms who report having done this have top-quartile digitisation scores. As part of their overall strategies, digital leaders also make digital investment a priority.
Top-quartile firms are 5.5 times more likely than bottom-quartile firms to outspend their
peers on digital initiatives, and 40 percent more likely to consider digital a top priority
for investment.
— Digital organisation: Many more digital leaders than laggards have a single business unit
that manages and coordinates digital initiatives for the entire company. Top-quartile firms
are 14.5 times more likely than bottom-quartile firms to centralise digital management,
and five times more likely to have a stand-alone, properly staffed analytics team. Companies we identify as digital leaders tend to have stronger support from their senior
executives. Top-quartile firms are 70 percent more likely than bottom-quartile firms to say
their CEO is “supportive and directly engaged” in digital initiatives.
— Digital capabilities: Almost by definition, digital leaders are digital adopters, and they
use digital productivity tools far more often than laggards. Top-quartile firms are 2.6 times
more likely than bottom-quartile firms to use customer relationship management software,
for example, and 2.5 times more likely to coordinate the management of their core business
operations by using an enterprise resource planning system. Digital leaders also optimise their digital marketing. Our survey shows that top-quartile
companies are 2.3 times more likely than bottom-quartile firms to use search engine
optimisation, and 2.7 times more likely to use social media for marketing (Exhibit 13).
While leaders and laggards are similar in some areas—for example, more than 90 percent of
each use internet banking and around 75 percent sell through their own websites—significant
differences exist in other areas. Less than 2 percent of laggards make use of Internet of Things–
enabled products, compared with 51 percent of leading firms; that is another example of how
leading companies are quicker to employ new digital technology, as is the fact that two-thirds of
leaders but only one-fourth of laggards have optimised their websites for mobile devices.
The difference between firms on the digital frontier and those far behind is not just about
whether firms invest in information technology—most companies do. Rather, the gap reflects
the degree to which digital assets are used, how they are used, and the extent to which firms
digitise their workplaces. Top-performing firms see going digital as an opportunity to reinvent
core processes, create new business models, and put customers at the centre of everything


Highly digitised firms also can rewrite the rules of competition by disrupting intermediaries,
breaking apart value chains, and exploiting network effects and low marginal costs to gain
hyperscale. When digitisation reaches critical mass across industries, it can spark fierce price
competition, shifting profits, and competitive churn in commercial ecosystems.80 Digitally
enabled innovations can have powerful network effects with “winner-take-most” dynamics,
although India may not yet be on the edge of such an economy-altering revolution.
Even digital leaders have room to improve
Digital leaders excel in several of the dimensions we used to compile the India Firm
Digitisation Index. For example, 95 percent of the leaders are using or in the process of
implementing digital distribution channels. More than 85 percent of digital leaders see
digital investment as one of their most important priorities. However, on many dimensions,
even leaders have a long way to go (Exhibit 14).
For example, only 55 percent of leaders currently believe they are investing more in digital
than their peers. Similarly, while top-quartile firms are much more likely than bottom-quartile
firms to say their CEO is supportive and directly engaged in digital initiatives, such CEOs are
still in the minority in India: only 40 percent of chief executives at digital leaders are directly
engaged in digital initiatives. Among bottom-quartile firms, that share drops to 24 percent

Only 45 percent of India’s digital leaders indicated that they have aligned their digital strategy
and overarching business strategy. Answers to follow up questions revealed that some of the
remainder focus on connecting digital to a particular business unit or a single function, such
as marketing or IT, rather than the entire company.
Easy wins can help bottom-quartile firms begin to close the gap
with digital leaders
The survey also offers a glimpse of paths to improvement for all Indian companies, leaders
and laggards alike. While the gap between firms is large, those who are behind may be able
to begin to close it by digitising in small, relatively simple ways (Exhibit 15).
Social media marketing is a good example. Bottom-quartile firms are 70 percent less likely
than top-quartile businesses to utilise social media to attract and serve new customers, and
less than half as likely to use e-commerce or listing platforms. However, these sales channels
are cheap and easily accessible, and a business owner with a smartphone and a high-speed
internet connection will encounter few barriers to taking advantage of them.

Digital payments are another example. Among bottom-quartile firms, only 18 percent receive
more than one-fourth of their revenue through electronic means; among digital leaders, that
proportion is 69 percent, nearly four times as high. In other words, almost three in four of the
bottom-quartile companies receive at least 75 percent of their revenue in cash. Easy-to-use,
inexpensive digital payment applications could help companies—even those, like food vendors,
who by necessity conduct their business face-to-face—close the digital payments gap.
Productivity-enhancing business software presents another opportunity for those lagging
behind to catch up with the digital leaders. Indeed, only 58 percent of top-quartile companies
already use customer relationship management systems. That compares with 22 percent of
bottom-quartile firms, which are also behind on use of enterprise resource planning systems
(29 percent) and industry-specific software (38 percent). These findings indicate how much
room firms have to catch up.
Small businesses are closing the digital gap with larger firms
Investing in some advanced technologies, such as artificial intelligence and the Internet
of Things, tends to require the financial resources and expertise of large companies.
However, growing high-speed internet connectivity and shrinking data costs are opening
digital opportunities for many small business owners and sole proprietors in India. More than
86 percent of the small firms surveyed believe digital has created new roles in the company.
As noted earlier, a firm’s size—as measured by revenue—was not predictive of its overall level
of digitisation across our sample of 664 businesses. In some technology areas where agility
is key to adoption, small firms have even surpassed their larger counterparts (Exhibit 16).
Digital payments are one example. Small businesses are ahead of large companies in
accepting digital payments and are paving the way for increased adoption of digital as a
replacement for cash payments. In our survey, 94 percent of small firms said they accept
payment by debit or credit card, compared with only 79 percent of big firms; for digital wallets,
the figures were 78 percent versus 49 percent.
Small companies also are more willing to use digital technologies such as video conferencing
and chat to support their customers. Where they are behind large companies, the gap is often
not very large. For example, our survey found that 70 percent of small firms have built their
own websites to reach clients, compared with 82 percent of large firms, and are just about as
likely as those big companies to have optimised their websites for mobile devices. Small firms
are less likely than big firms to buy display ads on the web (37 percent versus 66 percent),
but they are ahead of big companies in connecting with customers via social media, and more
likely to use search engine optimisation to make themselves easier to find.
More than 60 percent of the small firms surveyed use LinkedIn to hire talent, and about half
believe that most of their employees today need to have basic digital skills. The absence of
those skills may explain why 27 percent of the small firms surveyed still outsource some
or all their digital jobs and responsibilities.
While only 51 percent of smaller firms said they “extensively” sell goods and services via their
websites (compared with 73 percent of big businesses), small businesses use e-commerce
platforms and other digital sales channels just as much as large firms and are equally likely
to receive orders through digital means like WhatsApp.
58% 

The uneven digitisation of Indian businesses is both an opportunity and a challenge.
As digital strategy, organisation, and capabilities become key points of differentiation, a new
generation of leaders is emerging that appears to be pulling ahead of their peers. These
leaders in the top quartile of our India Firm Digitisation Index progressed by fully committing
to invest capital, acquire expertise, and build every part of their businesses around digital
technology. Companies that are behind risk losing out as digital raises productivity and boosts
innovation—and revenue. Yet nothing is set in stone. While some companies lead, their peers
have myriad ways to catch up, and even the leaders have considerable room to harness the
power of the new technologies more fully. As all companies wrestle with the imperatives of the
digital age, the potential benefits are coming into view. In the next chapter, we look at how big
those benefits could be by sizing the value of digital applications in a number of key sectors.

Digital technologies and platforms are poised to fundamentally change the way Indian
businesses operate internally and how they interact with their customers, suppliers, and
competitors. These technologies make it easier for businesses, people, and machines to
communicate instantly and continuously, eliminating intermediaries and enabling easier
collaboration, transactions, and sharing of information. Digital can increase productivity
by automating many tasks while at the same time collecting and analysing data to identify
inefficiencies, detect flaws and errors, and enable products and services to be customised.
Much is at stake in India’s digital transformation. In this chapter, we size the potential
economic benefits that could be achieved if the country successfully integrates digital
technologies in all sectors by 2025.81
Widespread digital adoption has the potential to create significant
value in all sectors of the economy by 2025
With digital applications becoming omnipresent in all sectors, we consider how they can
create value in three distinct types of sectors and activities. First are the core digital sectors
of IT-BPM, electronics manufacturing, and digital communication services. These sectors,
already well recognised as part of India’s digital economy, are inherently digital in nature or
create products and services that help others digitise. Second are newly digitising sectors
such as agriculture, financial services, healthcare, and logistics, which have traditionally not
been considered sectors of the digital economy but are increasingly using digital applications
to become more productive. Third are government services and markets for jobs and skills,
both of which are ripe for digital applications that can boost efficiency.
Core digital sectors already constitute a large and growing portion
of India’s economy and could contribute $355 billion to $435 billion
of GDP in 2025
India’s digital economy in 2017–18 accounted for 8 percent of nominal GDP, or about
$200 billion, according to our estimates. Most of this value—$170 billion—comes from core
digital sectors that already provide digital products and services at scale, including IT and
business process management, or IT-BPM ($115 billion); digital communication services,
including telecommunications ($45 billion); and electronics manufacturing, including mobile
handsets ($10 billion). The remaining value comes from early scaling of newly digitising
sectors and applications like e-commerce and direct benefit transfers. Core digital sectors
are expected to grow significantly faster than overall GDP growth, and their GDP contribution
could range from about $355 billion to $435 billion by 2025, according to our estimates.
India’s IT-BPM industry recorded $154 billion in revenue and accounted for 3.7 million jobs
in 2017.82 As global IT industry spending shifts toward new digital technologies and away
from legacy systems, the industry has the potential to generate $285 billion to $350 billion
81 Economic value is estimated as a range, based on the potential output of digital provider sectors (such as IT-BPM and
electronics manufacturing) as well as the potential adoption rate of key digital applications in other sectors and the
possible value arising, as a result, from higher productivity, resources savings, and tapping new factors of production.
See the technical appendix. 82 Make in India, January 7, 2019, makeinindia.com.
Potential economic
impact of digital
applications in 2025
3.
Digital India: Technology to transform a connected nation 53
in revenue, translating into $205 billion to $250 billion of value added in 2025. For this, it will
need to look beyond its current business model and build capabilities in advanced digital
applications—including automation, cloud, cybersecurity, mobile, AI, 3-D printing, IoT, big
data analytics, and social media—that are already transforming its clients globally.83 Digital
communication services are another example of a rapidly evolving sector, one with a potential
economic value of $50 billion to $55 billion in 2025. It consists of two connected but distinct
components: revenue and value added from digital communication services and from creation
of digital content. India’s data consumption will continue increasing at a rapid clip, propelled
by rising smartphone penetration, increased broadband connectivity in remote areas of the
country under the BharatNet2, and increasingly affordable data costs. Greater consumption
in turn will drive more content creation. India’s broadcast networks developed their own overthe-top on-demand video streaming platforms—Hotstar, SonyLIV, and VOOT—to meet rising
demand among increasingly connected consumers and to compete with new rivals. Global
platforms such as Netflix and Amazon Prime Video operate in India, producing or coproducing
original content for the Indian market.
Mobile handset manufacturing is a relatively new area of India’s digital economy. Imports
of mobile handsets declined by 37 percent from 2015–16 to 2016–17, in response to the
government’s Phased Manufacturing Programme, under which import duty is imposed
on certain subassemblies in cellular mobile handsets manufacturing. India has started
attracting investment in local producers. Some 118 units manufacturing mobile handsets and
components have emerged in the past three years, creating employment for about 450,000
persons directly and indirectly.84 Mobile handset production rose from 60 million units valued
at $2.9 billion in 2014–15 to 225 million units valued at $20.3 billion in 2017–18.85 A similar
approach could spur manufacturing of other digital devices such as medical electronics, LCD/
LED televisions, LED lighting products, and set-top boxes, along with automotive electronics.
Overall, electronics manufacturing has the potential to contribute $100 billion to $130 billion
in value added by 2025.
In newly digitising sectors, moderate to high adoption of a diverse set
of digital applications and business activities could occur by 2025
Alongside these already digitised sectors and activities are a number of sectors including
agriculture, education, energy, financial services, healthcare, and logistics that have not
traditionally had technology at their core. If India can nurture digital ecosystems and
applications in these areas, it could create considerable value. We sought to estimate the
potential economic value of digital technologies in these sectors by identifying transformative
digital opportunities, or sets of applications, whose economic value can be quantified. They
span a diverse set of sectors, ranging from financial services, education, and healthcare to
transport, trade, logistics, manufacturing, and agriculture. (For more on the methodology
behind these figures, see Box 3, “Using a value-impact approach to measure the digital
economy in India”.)
Some benefits of digital are already visible in these sectors, at times as the result of
successful pilot implementation. For example, in logistics, tracking vehicles in real time has
enabled truckers to reduce fleet turnaround time by 50 to 70 percent.86 Digitising supply
chains allows companies to reduce their inventory by 10 to 20 percent. In agriculture, farmers
can cut the cost of growing rice by 15 to 20 percent by harnessing data on soil conditions,
which can help them minimise the use of fertilisers and other inputs.87 A digital agricultural
marketplace allows more buyers to bid on commodities, pushing up prices for the farmers
by as much as 15 percent.\

Using a value-impact approach to measure
the digital economy in India
This research seeks to analyse and quantify the potential
economic impact of digital technology and applications
in India over the coming years. The starting point when
setting out to measure the digital economy is to first define
the term. The Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development describes the internet economy as “the
full range of our economic, social and cultural activities
supported by the internet and related information
and communications technologies”, underscoring the
concept’s sweeping nature and scope.1
Methodological challenges when measuring the size of
the digital economy start with the nature of GDP and its
measurement system, which recognises only market-based,
priced interactions as economic goods. For instance,
booking a hotel room online directly online, rather than
going through a travel agent or app that charged for the
service, would imply loss of GDP, unless the time saved was
deployed in market-based activities.2 Many digital products,
such as email, web search, and apps, are offered free or
at very low marginal cost to the consumer, while prices of
others, such as smartphones, tablets, and connectivity,
are falling. This implies more surplus for consumers of
these goods but potentially less GDP accounted for by
their producers. It is not clear how large this effect is—one
research study has concluded that the slowdown in US
productivity growth (as measured by GDP) over the last
decade cannot be explained by the shift in value from
measured revenue to unmeasured consumer surplus.3
Given these challenges, researchers have used various
approaches to estimate the size of the digital economy.
The direct-impact approach measures GDP value
added using the expenditure method, assessing private
consumption expenditure, public expenditure, private
investment, and trade balance, which are closely related to
digital products and services. Estimates vary, but studies
show that the size of the digital economy is 1 to 7 percent
of GDP in the countries considered.4 The dynamic-impact
approach looks at the statistical relationship between a
country’s digital profile and economic development. In a
recent study, the Institute for Competitiveness ran a statelevel regression of GDP per capita on capital, labour, and
internet penetration and found that a 10 percent increase
in internet penetration results in a 3.9 percent increase in
GDP per capita.5
1 Measuring the internet economy: A contribution to the research agenda, OECD Digital Economy Paper number 226, OECD, 2013. 2 Nadim Ahmad and Paul Schreyer, Are GDP and productivity measures up to the challenges of the digital economy? OECD, 2016. 3 Chad Syverson, “Challenges to mismeasurement explanations for the US productivity slowdown”, The Journal of Economic Perspectives,
American Economic Association, spring 2017, Volume 31, Number 2. 4 Measuring the internet economy: A contribution to the research agenda, OECD Digital Economy Paper number 226, OECD, 2013. 5 Amit Kapoor, Chirag Yadav, and Neera Vohra, Impact of Reliance’s entry: A socio-economic analysis of Jio-fication and India’s GDP story,
Institute for Competitiveness, March 2018.
We use a value-impact approach to understand and estimate
the potential effect of digital adoption on productivity based
on microevidence from sectors and firms. We identify
discrete use cases and estimate their potential impact
in terms of the productivity gains possible if they were to
scale up and achieve moderate to high levels of adoption.
Productivity gains are estimated through drivers such as
greater output using the same resources, cost savings, time
savings, or new sources of capital and labour that could
become available with the use of digital technologies.
The core digital sectors we describe (IT-BPM, digital
communication services, and electronics manufacturing)
are already considered part of India’s digital economy, and
their GDP contribution is measured based on conventional
revenue, expense, and value-added metrics. For the
newly digitising sectors (such as agriculture, education,
energy, financial services, manufacturing, healthcare,
logistics, and retail), as well as government services and
markets for jobs and skills, no economic data exist today
for technology-based business models and applications,
which are nascent or emerging, and not separately tracked
in national income accounts. For these areas, we focus on
creating broad estimates of potential economic value in
the future. We do estimate potential GDP impact because
the accounting and marketisation of productivity gains
remain uncertain and hard to predict.
All of our estimates are in nominal dollars in 2025 and
represent the potential for economic value creation in that
year. They do not represent market revenue or profit pools
for individual players; rather, they are estimates of end-toend value to the system as a whole. Some of the economic
value we size may or may not materialise as GDP or marketbased exchanges. For example, it is unclear whether time
saved will actually convert into productive and paying jobs,
and whether new digital services will generate consumer
surplus accruing to users of technologies or paid products
that yield revenue to producers. Nevertheless, we believe
these estimates provide a sense of the order of magnitude
of the impact that digitisation represents for an economy
of the scale and breadth of India’s.
Finally, our estimates of economic value in 2025 represent
India’s potential, not a prediction. The pace of progress will
depend critically on government policies and private-sector
action. Conducive government policies and programs could
spur entrepreneurs to innovate and help India’s economy
and society to fully incorporate new digital technologies.
For further details, see the technical appendix


Unlocking the potential value of digital in these sectors, as suggested by various pilots,
will require widespread adoption. The economic value will be proportionate to the extent to
which these digital processes permeate organisations. We segment the opportunities on
the basis of their likely adoption rate, which is a function of two dimensions: the degree of
public-sector support and readiness of enabling regulations and policies (since a number of
them, like healthcare, require policy amendments), and the degree of private-sector readiness
and interest, which is based on examples of scaled digital applications that h

Based on this assessment, we classify India’s digital opportunities into three groups
according to potential adoption range by 2025.
First are digital applications in areas where implementation is scaling up rapidly in the
private or public sector, or where there is significant unfulfilled demand due to policy barriers
government is already addressing. Examples of the former include e-commerce and the
government’s e-marketplace for online procurement. Examples of the latter include flowbased lending on the back of Goods and Services Tax Network data and other sources of
digitised business data, from government sources, utilities like credit scoring agencies, or
proprietary data aggregators. Such applications have the potential for the highest adoption
rates by 2025. We estimate this potential adoption to be between 60 and 80 percent of the
addressable market.
Exhibit 17
Public- and private-sector readiness drive digital adoption in India.
Potential adoption rates of addressable activities in 20151
Selected prioritised use cases shown
1 Adoption refers to percent of relevant addressable using a technology by 2025; adoption range of 20 to 80 percent over 2018–25 comes from
adoption curve developed in A future that works: Automation, employment, and productivity, McKinsey Global Institute, 2017. 2 Purchases outside of the government online purchase system. 3 Including e-commerce.
SOURCE: India’s Trillion Dollar Digital Opportunity, Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology, Government of India, February 2019;
McKinsey Global Institute analysis
Exhibit 17
Public- and private-sector readiness drive digital adoption in India
Source: McKinsey Global Institute analysis
1. Adoption refers to percent of relevant addressable using a technology by 2025; adoption range of 20 to 80 percent over 2018–25 comes from
adoption curve developed in A future that works: Automation, employment, and productivity, McKinsey Global Institute, 2017.
2. Purchases outside of the government online purchase system.
3. Including e-commerce.
Public
sector
support
High
Low
Low High
Private sector readiness
Potential adoption rates of addressable activities in 20251
Selected prioritised use cases shown
• Universal agricultural marketplace
• Precision agriculture
• Digital farmer nancing and insurance payout(s)
• Customisable student learning platforms
• Telemedicine consultations
• Applications for chronic disease management
• Online buying or selling and digital supply chain
• Flow-based lending and advanced credit
underwriting
• Digitally enabled power generation
• Government e Marketplace2
• Digital marketing3
• Digital payments
• Smart grids with distributed generation
• Online talent platforms
• Electronic health record
• Business digitisation and IoT-based analytics
• Evidence-based care using analytics
• E cient transportation and logistics platform
60–80%
40–60%
40–60%
20–40%
56 Digital India: Technology to transform a connected nation
Second are digital applications that are attracting strong private-sector interest and for which
the government is taking facilitating steps, or where the government is addressing barriers
to accelerate private-sector moves. Examples of the first type include business digitisation
within firms and digital logistics platforms, while examples of the latter include farmers trading
produce through online agricultural marketplaces. Although these areas will require policy
measures (such as the creation of a market facilitator to spur online agriculture trading), they
could be driven by private-sector innovation for the most part, with the government playing
a facilitating role. These applications would have the potential for moderate adoption rates,
40 to 60 percent of the addressable market, by 2025.
Third are digital applications in areas that require concerted government action, for example
to implement digital platforms or through significant policy reform. One example of this would
be government mandates to use electronic health records in the healthcare system. Another
would be creation of an online database that can track the employment journey of every worker
in the country, enabling large pools of individuals and institutions to collaborate in matching
labour market demand and supply. These applications have potential for levels of, adoption
by 2025 that we assume could be between 20 and 40 percent of the addressable market.
Newly digitising sectors could realise significant value from
digital technologies, as could government services and labour
market innovations
Digital applications spreading into new opportunity areas, such as education, healthcare,
and agriculture, that have low levels of digitisation at present, at the adoption rates mentioned
above, have the potential to create significant economic value by 2025. Newly digitising
sectors, as well as digital applications in government services and jobs and skills markets,
could each create $10 billion to $150 billion of incremental economic value in 2025 (Exhibit 18).
We assessed economic value potential across nine sectors, ordered by their potential scale
of value creation. They are financial services and digital payments; agriculture; education;
retail and e-commerce; logistics, supply chains, and efficient transportation; energy;
healthcare; e-government services; and jobs and skills markets. In the next chapter, we dive
deeper into four sectors—agriculture, healthcare, retail, and logistics—to assess specifically
how interactions between individuals and institutional entities within these sectors could be
reshaped as new data ecosystems emerge in them

Financial services and digital payments: We size the potential economic value from digital
initiatives such retail e-payments, flow-based lending, and advanced credit underwriting to
micro, small, and medium-size enterprises at $130 billion to $170 billion in 2025.
Fintech innovation is growing exponentially in India. Firms made early gains in digital
payments as the number of transactions in India—payments made with digital wallets, mobile
apps, and net banking—grew tenfold in four years, to 2.03 billion a month in 2017–2018
from 202 million a month in 2013–14.88 In addition, the United Payments Interface system
processed another 3.71 billion digital interbank transactions worth more than $68 billion
during 2018.89 A large majority of Indians—77.9 percent, behind only China—say they
use at least one nontraditional financial services firm.90 Some of these digital-first banks
are reaching significant scale: Paytm, which is backed by the Chinese e-commerce and
technology conglomerate Alibaba, has become India’s largest mobile payment and commerce
platform, with more than 300 million mobile wallet users and six million merchants.91 Based
on these trends and cross-country benchmarks, we estimate that 55 percent to 60 percent of
the value of all India’s retail transactions will be noncash payments by 2025, making savings
of 0.7 to 0.9 percent of GDP possible through better cash management, time saved, and lower
interest forgone.
Exponential growth in digital payments and associated data create new opportunities in
the way credit is assessed and delivered. India’s businesses, large and small, are poised
to generate a substantial amount of data, such as historical records of revenue, costs of
doing business, and market growth. This data on money flows can be used for advanced
credit underwriting and could enable banks to engage in so-called flow-based lending
to businesses that until now have been too small to efficiently assess their credit risk.
The efficiency gained from digital payments as well as the value unlocked by flow-based
lending could help India realise economic value between $130 billion to $170 billion in 2025,
assuming 60 to 80 percent of the unmet credit needs of micro, small, and medium-size
enterprises is fulfilled through such products.
Agriculture: Digital initiatives in farmer financing and insurance, precision agriculture, and
online agricultural trading may help India’s farm sector realise $50 billion to $65 billion
of additional value in 2025. We discuss agriculture in more depth in the next chapter.
Farmers, like many small businesses, can benefit by finding cheaper credit in a data-driven
environment. As a class, they rely on noninstitutional sources of capital, such as village
moneylenders, for more than 30 percent of their credit; interest on noninstitutional borrowing
is ten percentage points higher on average than bank rates.92 Digital applications that use
online payment history, receipts and credit records, invoices from input companies, digitised
land records that establish titling of collateral, and imaging solutions that establish crop status
can all help improve access and reduce the cost of crop finance and insurance.
Better access to capital would make it easier for farmers to acquire and use equipment and
services that raise productivity, such as networked satellites and terrestrial sensors and
probes, which capture and analyse real-time data on weather, soil conditions, animal health,
and other variables. Farmers could use the information to determine how much fertiliser,
pesticide, and other inputs are needed to maximise yields. Pilot programs employing this
precision agriculture have been found to increase productivity by 10 to 15 percent or more.9

Farmers (and consumers) can also benefit by gaining digital access to markets, offering better
prices for produce. Inadequate transportation and poor communication currently compel
many farmers to sell their crops at the nearest wholesale market, or mandi, with no choice
but to accept the prices at that location. Digital technology gives them access to buyers
across the country, often eliciting higher prices. Online trading increased farmers’ revenue
by 13 percent in a pilot project run by the Karnataka state government and the National
Commodity and Derivatives Exchange spot market.94
Digitisation also could address the issue of food lost to spoilage while being stored or
transported. More than $15 billion worth of agricultural goods were lost in this way in 2013.95
E-negotiable warehousing receipts may eventually let farmers sell to buyers in other parts
of India without having to transport their produce or livestock. Installing internet-connected
sensors in warehouses can warn of conditions that result in spoilage.
Education: Using digital tools and technologies to teach and train 40 to 60 percent of India’s
nearly 70 million new labour force entrants could add $20 billion to $50 billion of economic
value in 2025, according to our estimates.
Over the years, India has invested heavily to improve access to education, and this has
resulted in increased enrolment. Elementary education has become nearly universal, with a
gross enrolment ratio of 96.9 percent in 2015–16.96 Trends also show significant improvement
at the secondary and higher secondary levels: from 2010–11 to 2015–16, the gross enrolment
ratio for secondary schools increased from 65 percent to 80.1 percent, and from 39.3 percent
to 56.2 percent for higher secondary. The next step is to enrol the more than six million
children who do not go to school and to monitor and address the high rates of absenteeism
among those who are enrolled.
Digital content and channels provide a powerful opportunity to bridge remaining gaps in
access and improve learning outcomes. Interactive and gamified digital content that is
tailored for individual students can improve retention and learning outcomes by making
instruction more effective. Each additional year of schooling is estimated to result in about
8 percent higher wages.97
Retail and e-commerce: India’s retail sector is poised for extensive digitisation, with
e-commerce at the forefront. We describe this transformation in more detail in the following
chapter. By our estimates, e-commerce has the potential to create economic value of
$25 billion to $35 billion in 2025 in India’s retail sector, with the share of e-commerce gross
merchandise value rising from 5 percent of trade output (wholesale and retail) to about
15 percent by 2025, in line with countries such as China in 2015.

Propelled by the explosive growth of smartphone ownership, the number of online shoppers
in India more than quadrupled in four years, from 40 million in 2013 to 176.8 million in 2017,
when online sales revenue surpassed $20 billion.98 A McKinsey survey of consumer sentiment
in 2019 indicates that 79 percent of urban Indians already buy household supplies online,
making it the second most heavily used buying channel. In a global sample of 15 countries,
India is the most likely to increase the frequency of using the internet to buy household
supplies, either somewhat or significantly.
Access to the internet is a precondition for the rise of e-commerce. About 60 to 65 percent
of Indians are likely to have internet access by 2025, we estimate. Data from other countries,
such as China, indicate that when half or more of a nation’s populace has internet access,
e-commerce accounts for at least 15 percent of overall trade. More than half of India’s
e-commerce growth is coming from medium-size and smaller urban areas, often referred to
as Tier 2 and Tier 3 cities. Consumers in these cities do not have retail shops comparable to
those of large metro areas, so online stores expand their choice and increase convenience.
E-commerce platforms will impact India’s retail sector throughout the value chain, and not just
the consumer end. Large manufacturers, small and medium-size vendors, wholesale and retail
trade channels, and e-commerce companies constitute the supply chain. Customers expect
faster delivery and better service, while businesses need to lower the cost of carrying inventory
and reliably delivering to more locations. A digital supply chain can address these issues.
Leading consumer goods and e-commerce companies in India are already digitising their
supply chains—and reaping the benefits. Amazon runs its own end-to-end digital platform
with warehouses and fulfilment centres across India and offers its digital supply chain
service to more than 300,000 sellers on its platform, many of them small and mediumsize enterprises.99 The economic value in reduced inventory costs associated with digitisation
is reflected in the logistics and supply chain opportunity.
Logistics and efficient transportation: Digital technologies can raise efficiencies in India’s
sprawling logistics and transportation systems, as we describe in more detail in the next
chapter. We estimate that digitised applications in logistics, supply chains, and passenger
transportation can unlock value ranging from $25 billion to $30 billion in 2025.
India currently spends 13 to 14 percent of its GDP on logistics, compared to 9 percent for
the United States and 8 percent for Europe, according to McKinsey estimates. Multiple
factors explain high costs in India, including inadequate infrastructure and repetitive and
cumbersome procedures. In 2018, India ranked 44th out of 160 countries on the World Bank’s
Logistics Performance Index, with a score of 3.18 out of 5.100 Poor performance on timeliness
(shipments reaching their destinations by their scheduled or expected delivery times) and
inefficient clearance processes, including customs, dragged down India’s overall score.

The government of India is putting together an integrated logistics portal that links shippers,
carriers, and customers to facilitate trade and collaboration. The platform is envisioned to
be a single-window clearance system that will allow shippers to find the optimal means of
transporting goods and the right warehousing and packaging facility (including cold chain)
while also helping them to initiate and complete the associated documentation process.
Efficient logistics coupled with digitised supply chains (discussed earlier in the section on
the retail sector) can drive significant savings in inventory costs. The economic value sized for
this sector includes the potential impact of 60 to 80 percent of the output of India’s industrial
sector being connected through digitally enabled supply chains by 2025, with consequent
reductions in inventory and improved ability to match customer needs with stock at retail
outlets. Online platforms for passenger transportation (for example, hired rides for taxis)
also form part of the opportunity.
Energy: India is the fourth-largest consumer of electricity and the third-largest producer
of electricity in the world. The efficiencies promised by digital technology in India’s power
sector could realise $10 billion to $15 billion of savings by 2025, according to our estimates.
Installing digital meters for all households while also digitising and automating the power
grid could both improve the reliability of service and bring down aggregate technical and
commercial losses, a combination of energy lost to equipment malfunction and theft as
well as revenue lost to inefficient billing and collection.
Linking digital meters to the internet to enable bidirectional communication between
consumers and the utility—technology known as advanced metering infrastructure—
could provide utilities with data they can use to improve the speed and accuracy of
billing, detect grid problems quicker, advise customers on saving energy, and uncover
electricity theft. Advanced metering infrastructure also is essential to creating a “smart
grid” that would, among other things, allow for the bidirectional flow of power required for
distributed electricity generation by rooftop solar panels, wind turbines, and other means.
The government has initiated a National Smart Grid Mission to optimise and automate the
grid for efficient power delivery.
Healthcare: Digital technology has the potential to deliver value in many areas of the
healthcare system, as we describe in the following chapter. We estimate that it may save
$4 billion to $5 billion in 2025.
Telemedicine models have the technical capability to handle up to half of in-person outpatient
consultations. We believe a program of accelerated implementation may enable India to tap
60 to 80 percent of this potential by 2025. Telemedicine initiatives globally have shown that
virtual doctor visits cost about 30 percent less than in-person visits.101
To tap this potential, India will need to enact legislation to, among other things, establish
the validity of telemedicine and online prescriptions, and determine the legal jurisdiction for
medical negligence cases if a doctor and patient are in different states. The Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare has released a draft Digital Information Security in Healthcare Act to
enforce privacy and security measures for electronic health data, and to regulate storage
and exchange of electronic health records.

Beyond its economic value, telemedicine could benefit patients in remote and rural areas by
reducing their reliance on unqualified local medical practitioners and saving time and money
spent travelling to a nearby city or town to see a medical expert. India has too few doctors:
just 0.8 physician for every 1,000 persons, which is below the World Health Organization’s
recommendation of 1.0 per 1,000.102 Adding to the problem in rural areas, cities have only
32 percent of India’s people but 60 percent of its hospitals.103 Data also could help public
officials make better-informed decisions about annual budgets and infrastructure
expansion, among other matters.
E-government services: Government is the biggest economic entity in the digital
ecosystem, and its efficiency and productivity significantly influence systemic efficiency.
Digital applications have direct impact on two government interactions: subsidy transfer and
government purchases. Accelerated implementation and expansion of current government
initiatives in both of these areas combined could yield savings of $20 billion to $40 billion
in 2025, we estimate.
From the launch of the Direct Benefit Transfer programme in January 2013 through
December 2018, the government transferred a total of $82.6 billion in benefits from
434 schemes to 3.4 billion beneficiaries cumulatively.104 The government could move
additional large payments—including subsidies for food grains, skills training, midday meals
for schoolchildren, and the construction of toilets under the Swachh Bharat programme—
to DBT over the next few years.
Procurement by general government, department enterprises, and non-departmental
enterprises constitutes about 13 percent of GDP, which amounts to about $300 billion
annually.105 Efficiencies unlocked in the government procurement process could therefore
yield significant benefits. In 2016, the government set up the Government e Marketplace (GeM)
to significantly cut the cost of frequently used goods and services, reduce the time taken
in procurement without weakening risk management, and promote the transition to digital
payments. GeM is an open API that includes e-commerce functionalities such as demand
aggregation, dynamic pricing, e-bidding, order placement, price comparisons, reverse auction,
and search, as well as continuous vendor assessments, digital contract signatures, digitally
verified buyer authentication, easy return policies, and facilities for digital documents.
Jobs and skills markets: Nationwide, online marketplaces that bring together potential
workers and employers or work providers could improve India’s fragmented and largely
informal job markets. Scaling up the digital marketplaces could yield $65 billion to $70 billion
of economic value in 2025, by our estimates.
Much of India’s economy relies on informal networks for employers to fill vacancies and
workers to find employment. Job market systems have not kept pace with increased worker
mobility or with disruptions to organisational and business models. Digital technologies
offer alternatives because they can be deployed to quickly and accurately match job seekers
with openings based on their skills, experience, and interests. The first step is to aggregate
information about trained candidates and available jobs by sector and geography across
the country, including remote and rural areas. A few private online job marketplaces, such
as Naukri.com and Babajob, currently collect information on the job seekers and employers
who use their platforms, but this does not present a complete picture of the labour ma

More comprehensive platforms of labour market information could be created. They would
measure and match demand and supply for skills and by geography. Based on benchmarks
from global experience, we estimate that large online talent marketplaces could help
20 million to 28 million people secure work that they otherwise would not have found.
About 6 million to 8 million could find jobs that are better matched to their skills. Online
talent marketplaces could significantly improve job seekers’ and employers’ productivity
by reducing job search time by 7 to 22 percent. Employers also could benefit by lowering
attrition rates and having better information to target employees with required skills

Accelerating momentum on government policies and programs is
essential to enable widespread digital adoption and value creation
Our quantification of economic value in 2025 represents India’s potential, not a prediction
of what it will actually achieve. The pace of progress that India makes on its digital journey in
coming years will depend critically on government policies and private-sector action. In the
following section, we summarise some recent encouraging trends, but we underscore that
losing momentum in either area would mean India could realise half or less of the potential
value by 2025.
Government policies and programs could spur entrepreneurs to innovate and help India’s
economy and society to fully incorporate new digital technologies. Personal data is an area
where government policy is vital, both to enable innovation by digital providers and to protect
the rights of digital consumers. Data is poised to become as important to the 21st century as
oil was to the 20th century, and India has become data-rich, thanks to its large population and
active digital consumers. Policy makers have a critical role to play in laying out rules for usage
of data so that it neither stifles innovation nor compromises the privacy and confidentiality of
personal data. The government is already establishing ownership, privacy, and confidentiality
standards for personal data usage.
Public data has an important role to play as well. To enable a robust data ecosystem, the
government could ensure that all of its ministries’ and agencies’ digital initiatives conform
to Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY) guidelines for open
application program interfaces. This will ensure that innovators can access and use public
data to create products.
Some domains require explicit government action—such as investment in or implementation
of digital capabilities—to gain traction. One example is the government’s Bharatnet Phase
2 program to improve connectivity by installing broadband optic-fibre cable to all 250,000
villages with gram panchayats, or village councils, by March 2019.106 The plan is for every gram
panchayat to have about five Wi-Fi access points, including an average of three for public
institutions such as educational centres, health centres, post offices, and police stations.
To boost investment in last-mile connectivity, the government will offer viability gap
funding to private-sector participants
Digital technology can create millions of jobs and new types of work;
workers will need retraining and redeployment
The changes brought by digital adoption will disrupt India’s labour force alongside the
industries affected. While technology will supplant workers in some areas, it will augment
them in other areas, enabling them to be more productive. Many jobs will change as machines
complement humans in the workplace. To prepare for these changes, workers will need
to be retrained.
Prior MGI research on automation’s impact on work gave rise to scenarios surrounding
workforce transitions.107 Our analysis for India suggests that the growth in demand for
labour, barring extreme scenarios, could more than offset the number of jobs lost to digital
technology and work automation. However, some work will be automated or rendered
obsolete. We estimate that all or parts of 40 million to 45 million existing jobs could be
affected by 2025. These include data-entry operators, bank tellers, clerks, and insurance
claims- and policy-processing staff. Many millions of people who currently hold these
positions will need to be retrained and redeployed—an operation that India’s IT industry
association, the National Association of Software and Services Companies (NASSCOM),
has described as “an urgent and massive imperative”.108
At the same time, the heightened productivity and increased demand generated by digital
technology applications may create enough new jobs to offset that substitution and employ
more workers if the requisite training and investments occur. We estimate that as many as
60 million to 65 million new jobs could be created from the direct impact of productivityboosting digital applications. These jobs could be created in industries as diverse as
construction and manufacturing, agriculture, trade and hotels, IT-BPM, finance, media and
telecom, and transport and logistics (Exhibit 19). This could mean more jobs for architects,
carpenters, electricians, construction labourers, retail salespeople, food preparers and
handlers, delivery executives, health workers, teachers and trainers, web developers, and
non-technology support staff.
Agriculture is a case in point. Services enabled by digital technologies—from site-specific
fertiliser and irrigation advice to speedy crop insurance payouts based on drone images
and IoT sensor data—could make agriculture more productive and release many agricultural
workers for higher-paying jobs in new digital value chains in the farm sector or elsewhere.
The challenge for India will be to create affordable and effective retraining programs at scale.
This could require coordinated actions by policy makers, business leaders, and educators as
well as individuals. Industry leaders and educators, with government facilitation and support,
may need to consider developing a new national technology curriculum to teach the skills
that will be required by emerging digital technologies such as the Internet of Things,
artificial intelligence, and 3-D printing

Work enabled by new digital marketplaces. Digital marketplaces, or online platforms
that enable the sale of goods and services, are changing labour market dynamics by
creating new value chains of workers linked to organised, digitally enabled businesses.
E-commerce in India generates close to $20 billion in merchandise value annually and
employs between 150,000 and 200,000 people, mostly in goods delivery and logistics.111
In line with expected internet penetration for India by 2025, McKinsey has estimated that
e-commerce is likely to become four to six times its current size and could create 500,000
jobs, based on today’s job intensity. Similarly, cab aggregators such as Uber and Ola book
three million to five million rides daily, providing work for 600,000 to 700,000 drivers.
With the biggest 30 cities accounting for more than 90 percent of their business, there is
ample room to expand. In China, the biggest cab operator, DiDi, books around 25 million
rides per day and says it provides flexible job opportunities for 21 million drivers.112
— Digitally enabled on-demand work for independent freelance workers. Digital
technologies and the platforms they enable make work divisible and help workers access
opportunities remotely. A growing army of freelancers worldwide wants autonomous,
project-based work, typically in the work-from-home model. This is a particularly attractive
opportunity for women professionals who may drop out of the regular workforce for a time
due to family obligations. Currently, around 15 million freelancers are registered in India,
and platforms such as Flexing It are providing them with employment opportunities.113
Measuring the value that digital technologies can create across sectors is at best an
approximate science, based on a wide range of variables. Nonetheless, the range of potential
value that we find across India’s economy from a full-on embrace of digital is significant.
While this value cannot be added up and translated into GDP, the boost to growth that digital
potentially offers is substantial, and millions of jobs are at stake. Managing the transitions
will be challenging, especially in the labour market. One imperative for policy makers and
business leaders will be to retrain workers on an unprecedented scale. But the accompanying
opportunities may allow India to make a step change in its economy, improving productivity,
offering innovative solutions, and enabling millions of ordinary Indians to find more fulfilling
and higher-paying work.

Digital technologies are most powerful, and can create the most value, when the forces
they unleash integrate services across digital sector boundaries into new digital ecosystems.
Online shopping, mobile banking, ride sharing, and other digitally enabled services are all
examples of these new ecosystems, and they have raised consumers’ expectations of speed
and convenience. In this chapter, we offer a more detailed look at how technology forces
connect businesses with customers and one another, automate interactions, and analyse
the data created. The resulting digital ecosystems could transform four sectors of India’s
economy: agriculture, healthcare, retail, and logistics.
Connect-automate-analyse: three tenets of digital integration
that may spur the rise of new ecosystems
Digital technologies can fundamentally change how individuals and businesses perform dayto-day activities in three ways: by allowing people to connect to collaborate, transact, and
share information; by enabling organisations to automate routine tasks to boost productivity;
and by providing organisational leaders with the tools they need to analyse data to formulate
insights and improve decision making.
— Digital connectivity is the ability of individuals to communicate and collaborate quickly
and easily within big organisations and around the world. Corporate solutions like Slack
and Skype allow collaboration in widely distributed workforces, enabling businesses to
save time and money on travel. Connectivity also removes the need for intermediaries
in many transactional relationships, which not only improves efficiency but has given
rise to the shared economy, leading to significantly better utilisation of assets and skills.
— Automation improves productivity by using digitally enabled machines to perform
tasks once done only by people, such as packing boxes and assembling automobiles.
The advent of faster computers, advanced sensors, and sophisticated algorithms is
allowing automation to expand into more complex tasks, such as driving cars. Previous
MGI research estimated that automation could raise productivity growth globally by
0.8 to 1.4 percent annually.114
— Digital analytics is the process of using computers to sort, compare, and contrast large
amounts of data to find patterns, relationships, and insights that previously were too
expensive or time-consuming to produce. This information can markedly refine decision
making and improve customer service. Data-driven decision making has given rise to
new business models, such as instant claims processing by the online insurer Lemonade.
114 A future that works: Automation, employment, and productivity, McKinsey Global Institute, January 2017.

India’s growing number of connected consumers increasingly expect to have multiple needs
met simultaneously and seamlessly. This has opened an opportunity for businesses to capture
value by integrating services across traditional sector boundaries in new digital ecosystems.
Companies best positioned to seize digital’s lucrative ecosystem opportunities are those that
aggregate consumer needs and serve them in an integrated fashion. Amazon is an example:
born an online bookseller, it has expanded aggressively into many corners of e-commerce as
well as cloud computing, logistics, consumer electronics, entertainment, and even groceries.
Amazon seeks to become a “one-stop shop” for needs related to shopping, entertainment,
and finance. Customers can, for example, use Amazon Pay to watch TV shows on Prime Video
or listen to music on Prime Music. All of these services are available via a single login account,
maximising consumer convenience.
Tencent is another example of an ecosystem player: from its roots as an instant-messaging
service, it has regularly added other businesses of interest to its customers, including finance,
gaming, movies, and social media. Rakuten began as an online mall and added financial
services (credit cards, mortgages, and securities brokerage), created one of Japan’s largest
online travel portals, and signed up 800 million users to its instant-messaging app, Viber.
What these digital conglomerates have in common is a knack for integrating services
across traditional sector boundaries to satisfy consumers who increasingly expect seamless
service. Speed and convenience are becoming more and more important to consumers,
adding an important dimension on which service providers must compete. Successful
companies are responding by dismantling legacy parallel value chains and collapsing
them into new single chains to meet each key customer need (Exhibit 20).
New ecosystems are likely to emerge in sectors that are ripe for digital transformation.
Agriculture is India’s largest source of jobs but is unproductive: crop yields lag behind
global benchmarks, and a significant share of each year’s harvest is lost to spoilage.
Healthcare suffers from too few doctors and hospital beds, and those it has are misallocated,
with most resources in cities while most Indians live in rural areas. Retailers often operate in
the cash-only informal economy, depriving the government of tax revenue and raising the cost
of credit for store owners. Logistical services are expensive, heavily reliant on paperwork,
and depend on increasingly congested national highway


Agriculture is a critical component of India’s economy, contributing 18 percent of the
country’s GDP and employing 45 percent of its workforce.115 However, agriculture is
markedly inefficient in India—the average farm takes up a little more than one hectare
and produces yields of rice, maize, and other major crops that are one-half to one-fifth
those of its counterparts in Brazil, China, Russia, and other developing economies.116
Multiple factors contribute to this poor performance, including subscale farm sizes, low
investment in capital such as traditional farm equipment, and suboptimal farm practices
brought on by low availability of information. Some Indian farmers have relatively little insight
into farm and environmental variables like weather, sunlight, and rainfall. Once Indian farmers
harvest their relatively small crops, inadequate storage and inefficient transport leads to
approximately 40 percent of the produce spoiling before reaching consumers.
Improving agricultural productivity would help boost overall economic growth and raise
incomes in rural areas; India’s 263 million farm workers earn an average of just $3.12 a day.117
Consequently, increasing farm incomes is a priority for national and state governments across
India. However, underdeveloped financial ecosystems and subscale farms make achieving
this goal a particular challenge.
One sign of the underdeveloped financial ecosystem is that 36 percent of India’s farmers take
out loans from informal sources.118 They pay interest rates that are about 10 percentage points
higher than bank rates, and they are often trapped in cycles of debt.119 The lack of a financial
ecosystem means farmers can have difficulties securing crop insurance. Less than 24 percent
of the gross cropped area in India was under insurance in 2017–18, compared with 89 percent
in the United States and 69 percent in China.120 While government schemes exist to make
crop insurance more affordable, 67 percent of farmers are unaware of these programs,
according to a survey by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.121 This leaves farmers
extremely vulnerable to disasters like landslides or unforeseen rainfall patterns.
Subscale farms pose other challenges. India’s average farm size is about 1.1 hectares,
compared to 180 hectares in the United States, and 45 percent of farmers are small or
marginalised.122 Meanwhile, crop prices realised by farmers remain unsustainably low,
partially because of the large markups commanded by middlemen in the supply chain. This
combination of factors has resulted in perpetually low farm profitability, with many farmers
struggling to make ends meet. In a recent survey, 76 percent of farmer respondents indicated
that they would prefer to give up farming if they could find another employment option.123


Digital technology can raise farm productivity and create
new opportunity for farmers
Digital technologies can play a key role in transforming agriculture across the value chain
by connecting farmers to markets and shared equipment, automating farm management
processes, and analysing data to drive actionable insights for farmers (Exhibit 21).
Important use cases include digital farmer financing and insurance, farm advisory for
precision agriculture, and online marketplaces for produce facilitated by digital technologies.
Each use case independently has strong potential to increase farm incomes, but their
combined impact could enable a step change in incomes. Each use case will need to be
specifically tailored to the Indian context in order to be effective. Purveyors of digital solutions
must contend with the problem of serving millions of small farms that individually have low
levels of disposable income. The creation of an ecosystem enabling the aggregation of data
from across disparate sources will be of paramount importance for enabling products to
help farmers. Public data sources like digital land records could be combined with other
agricultural data sources, public and private, to provide the information backbone necessary
to support a variety of agriculture solutions

Digital technologies will enable financial services firms to offer
lending and insurance products to farmers who are underserved today
A lack of documentary evidence of financial history often prevents farmers from accessing
banks to serve their financial needs. Digital bank accounts can begin to bridge this gap by
creating verifiable transaction records, including electronic receipt of agricultural subsidies.
This enables banks to more accurately assess credit risks when farmers seek financing to
buy seed, fertiliser, and pesticide for the coming season or to invest in the digital technologies
needed for precision agriculture. Access to bank credit could produce considerable savings
on interest payments and enable farmers to affordably borrow enough to acquire more
advanced technology.
Even with data-driven digital credit-risk models, lenders still face considerable uncertainty
in serving small and marginal farmers. Lenders will require creative and flexible solutions to
protect themselves as they meet farmers’ individual needs, and digital solutions can help. The
government-sponsored Kisan Credit Card program allows farmers access to a flexible credit
facility with repayments that can be rescheduled in the event of demonstrated unforeseen
circumstances. Additional solutions to decrease risk could include ring-fenced disbursal
accounts available only for certain purchases as well as loan repayments that are triggered
automatically when a borrower sells his or her crop.
Meanwhile, easily accessible digital information about land ownership, weather, and other
variables could improve and extend crop insurance underwriting. The same data, augmented
with imagery from satellites, drones, or an individual’s mobile phone, could speed the claims
process and accelerate payouts if crops fail (Exhibit 22).
The Climate Corporation, a US-based subsidiary of Monsanto established in 2006, pioneered
using weather data to offer insurance products. Payment is based on the occurrence of fixed
insured events (for example, a drought) that relieves farmers of the need to file claims at all
and avoids the costly exercise of assessing actual crop damage. The Climate Corporation sold
its weather-based insurance scheme to insurer AmTrust Financial Services in 2015.124

Using data to advise farmers on which crops to grow and the right
amount of fertiliser to use
The increasing availability of real-time data from a variety of sources can enable entities to
offer customised advice to farmers, commonly known as “precision agriculture”. Advice on
achieving more scientific practices can enable farmers to increase their productivity, even if
they are not able to adhere strictly to all best practices. Public or private agencies can advise
farmers on the need for inputs—and even the mix of crops likely to produce maximum profit—
after their algorithms analyse soil conditions, aerial images, weather forecasts, and other
factors over a four- to six-month crop cycle. Additional advice is provided based on real-time
data from internet-connected sensors in the field and GPS-enabled equipment that delivers
the optimal amount of inputs at the individual crop level (Exhibit 23). For this to take place,
critical building blocks in the form of complete and interoperable data must be available
from which to generate recommendations State and union government agencies across India collect vast amount of agricultural data
each year by way of about 800 national, state and research institutions. This rich data
infrastructure includes information such as seed availability from Seednet India Portal, weather
patterns from meteorological departments, and daily mandi prices on Agmarknet. Additionally,
the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare has distributed more than 158 million Soil
Health Cards to farmers, capturing farm-level soil fertility data from each farm.125
While a vast amount of data exists, it is difficult to analyse in its current form due to a lack of
interoperability among various sources tracked by different agencies. In order for proliferation
of digital applications like precision advisory services to flourish, data will have to be captured
and made available using common languages and schemas to ensure that they can be
linked and analysed across sources. As the volume of data continues to grow, public-private
partnerships will be needed to process the aggregated information meaningfully.

Globally, large agriculture-input providers such as Monsanto and Mosaic are using data to
provide actionable insights for farmers. Monsanto has launched a farm-management platform
with the aim of providing advice for planting and crop nutrition using farm-level weather and soil
testing data. Monsanto has invested heavily in proprietary algorithms to accomplish this. Mosaic
has gone another route, starting CropNutrition.com as a digital hub for information on soil
fertility and crop nutrition. Nutrient management algorithms provide advice for farmers without
the use of any farm-level data, providing a simpler but lower-investment tool for farmers.
In India, attempts to bring precision agriculture advisory to farmers are less developed but
emerging quickly. The mKRISHI app, a technology platform developed by Tata Consultancy
Services, has more than one million users registered on its platform. It offers customised
real-time information to help them plan activities.126 Disease management using real-time
image processing and integrated data from a network of wirelessly connected stations
reading parameters like temperature and humidity allow mKRISHI to deliver actionable
insights to farmers. This has led to improvements of as much as 40 percent in yields for
participating farmers year-over-year along with significant cost decreases.
Viable digital sales platforms can mean more leverage and higher
prices for farmers
Digital technologies can continue to increase farm incomes after harvest by helping farmers
improve the price they are paid for their produce. Most of India’s 138 million farms sell their
crops at local mandis, or wholesale markets, where buyers usually are scarce and sellers have
little bargaining power, resulting in poor income realisation. A viable nationwide online trading
platform could address this problem by providing farmers and traders with timely information
about prices and supply as well as an alternate venue in which to transact crop sales.
When accompanied by enabling digital infrastructure, such a digital venue would give
farmers access to a larger pool of potential buyers. The government already has made
its Electronic National Agriculture Market (eNAM) available in 585 markets in 16 states; it
also enables buying and selling commodities on its mKisan portal, which delivers technical
advice to farmers.127 An estimated $5 billion in goods traded on the eNAM platform in
2017, representing about 2 percent of crop sales. However, several challenges restrict its
widespread adoption. The main problem is trust: how can buyers be sure they will receive
the right product on time? Integration of e-warehousing and a logistics interface to assure
timely produce delivery can help, as can digital verification of transactions and identities or
of institutional facilitators who stand to act as guarantors between small buyers and sellers.
Firms working in this ecosystem will also need to consult closely with state governments to
manage the regulatory and legal environment, because agricultural sales are heavily and
disparately regulated in different states.
ITC’s e-Choupal system attempts to solve these problems by offering farmers a separate
transaction platform that’s currently available in more than 40,000 villages. Farmers can
visit a kiosk in their village to check prices at several local mandis, helping them make
better decisions on when and where to sell their produce. The Choupal Saagar portion of
the program allows ITC to purchase produce directly from farmers, eliminating the need for
intermediaries and thus offering better prices and timely payments to the farme

To succeed, digital markets for perishable produce must also be able to verify the quality of
the goods being sold. Digital technology can offer solutions here, too. For example, Agricx
Lab’s digital potato-grading system certifies potatoes using photographs and a proprietary
algorithm that considers parameters such as firmness and minor and major flaws.
Low productivity on Indian farms offers opportunities
The potential gains from digital agriculture applications could be considerable. For example,
moving 40 to 60 percent of agriculture product sales to a universal marketplace by 2025 is
forecasted to increase prices paid to farmers by 15 percent.128 Widespread implementation
of advisory for precision agriculture, such as digitally enabled advice on crop choice, fertiliser
use, weather patterns, and other variables, could increase yields by 15 to 20 percent, or
$20 billion to $25 billion per year by 2025.129 Combined, these and other digital technologies
could help food production better keep pace with the country’s population growth, add
$50 billion to $70 billion of economic value in 2025—and fundamentally change Indian
agriculture.130
Individual farmers stand to gain from digital technologies at every turn in their crop cycle.
Receiving digitally enabled credit and insurance, instead of a loan from the local middleman,
can lead to other benefits. A digitally enabled farmer may use advisory services to plant
the most efficient crops for his soil type, avoid a pest infection thanks to an app-based
notification, and harvest crops at the opportune time. The farmer is then free to sell the
produce using an online platform to command a fair market price instead of selling produce
back to a local middleman to settle his debts, allowing him to pay off his formal loan with
money to spare (Exhibit 24).
While national and state governments drew up the plan for doubling farmers’ income and then
laid the regulatory and programmatic foundation, private companies now have an opportunity
to collaborate with the public sector to pilot offerings using available data. For example, a
Bangalore software firm, CropIn, offers a farm-management solution over the internet, but
rather than try to approach tens of thousands of individual farmers, the firm works through the
Karnataka state government and local farmer producer organisations, which are collectives
with hundreds of members.131
Even companies without a product to sell may find opportunities as Indian agriculture goes
digital. For instance, the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare plans to demonstrate the
benefits of Soil Health Card advisories in roughly 600,000 villages; it intends to partner with
the private sector to complete the job in a reasonable time

Capturing value from digital applications in agriculture will require
concerted effort from all stakeholders
Companies, governments, and farmers can adopt digitally focused strategies to maximise value.
Agriculture input and equipment providers will need to work to figure out where they belong 
in this new ecosystem while simultaneously digitising their own internal operations. Data
and information collection will allow these firms to better understand customers and offer
an opportunity to optimise operations and personalise services for farmers. Additionally,
precision agriculture insights, especially concerning risks, weather, and yield estimates,
create an opportunity for input providers to predict demand geographically and plan their
supply networks accordingly.
Financial services firms have an opportunity to serve millions of farmers with loans and
insurance products enabled by digital. More personal and financial data are available today
than before, and the collection, processing, and use of this data to evaluate risks and trigger
payouts will be a main success factor for lenders. To mitigate the inherent riskiness of serving
farmers, lenders can work to design systems that use digital technologies to reduce their
own risk by, for example, disbursing loan amounts only through verified digital payments
for specific items.
The national, state, and local governments can invest in leading the charge for digital
adoption. Initiatives such as the Soil Health Card and Kisan Call Centre will generate large
amounts of useful data. Using this data to the greatest possible extent will require an open
and collaborative attitude, including support for public-private partnerships to analyse and
disseminate the data. Additionally, governments can increase stability by supporting and
retraining any farm workers who are displaced by digitisation in the sector.
Finally, it will ultimately be up to all farmers to capture the benefits of digital for themselves.
Better information and advice could boost productivity: farmers who become “smart”
consumers of this information and rely on its authenticity will improve their yields. Realising
these benefits will require engaging digitally with other stakeholders, so individual digital
literacy will be vital to each farmer’s success.India’s healthcare system is expansive but faces many difficult challenges, particularly in
poor states and rural areas. The country is home to many medical professionals: more than
one million doctors (about as many as in the United States) and almost two million nurses and
midwives.132 However, it has too few of them relative to the size of its population: 2.2 for every
1,000 persons, compared with 2.8 in China.133 It also has an urban-rural divide: 60 percent of
Indian hospitals are in cities, where only 32 percent of the country’s population resides.134
Some of these issues may reflect a relative decline in spending. India spent the equivalent of
4.2 percent of its GDP on healthcare in 2000, but only 3.9 percent in 2015, the latest year for
which the World Health Organization has full data. Over the same period, China’s healthcare
spending rose from 4.5 percent of its GDP to 5.3 percent.135 The difference is starker in dollar
terms: India spends $63 per capita on healthcare each year, compared with $426 in China.136
The government is taking the lead. While individuals and insurers account for 70 percent
of India’s health spending (about one-third of the populace has private insurance), the
government exerts significant influence over the system through state-funded insurance
programmes. Rashtriya Swasthya Suraksha Yojana, for example, pays routine medical
expenses for 40 million households below the poverty line, and government schemes
spend 1.2 percent of GDP on healthcare. This gives elected officials leverage to encourage
further adoption of medical technologies to improve services and lower costs (see Box 4,
“Government schemes enable wider adoption of digital tools to improve care”)

Government schemes enable wider adoption
of digital tools to improve care
A significant number of Indian households—estimated at
15 to 20 percent—face unaffordable medical bills each year
because of serious illness or accidents.1 To address this
issue, the government recently introduced the National
Health Protection Mission (Ayushman Bharat) to subsume
current government health schemes and provide up to
$7,500 annually to cover the cost of medical specialists and
hospital stays for about 100 million vulnerable families.2
To make the scheme work, the government acknowledged
that it needs a digital platform as an essential technology
backbone. In addition to enabling the quick enrolment
of insurers and patients, the platform also could host
1 “World Bank support to the health sector in India”, World Bank, April 6, 2010; Anamika Pandey et al., “Trends in catastrophic health expenditure in India:
1993 to 2014”, Bulletin of the World Health Organization, January 1, 2018, Volume 96, Number 1. 2 “Ayushman Bharat for a new India 2022 announced”, Ministry of Finance press release, February 1, 2018, pib.gov.in.
electronic health records for each patient. These EHRs
can improve the quality of care and provide anonymised
data to conduct research and help insurance providers
determine accurate premiums. Such a platform also could
decrease operating costs throughout the system by, for
example, reducing the need for administrative staff and
enabling insurers to speedily settle claims by verifying
information online.
As with all EHR data, any information sharing would
need to follow the guidelines of the national digital health
authority and be approved by the patient. Draft versions
of the Digital Information Security in Healthcare Act aim
to establish these guidelines for generation, collection,
storage, transmission, and ownership of patient health data,
and would establish a central regulator called the National
Electronic Health Authority to enforce these standards.

Critical gaps in India’s healthcare system diminish patient outcomes
On a nominal basis, India has made dramatic gains in the health and wellness of its citizens.
For example, Indians born in 1951 could expect to live, on average, for 37 years; by 2018,
the average life span was 69 years.137 Yet the country ranks 125th among all nations in life
expectancy.138 Indian women today are three times as likely to die in childbirth as women in
Brazil, Russia, China, and South Africa—and more than ten times as likely to die giving birth as
women in the United States. India also trails other big emerging economies in infant mortality,
childhood nutrition, and other public health markers. Infectious diseases are widespread,
including the world’s highest incidence of tuberculosis, the most cases of HIV/AIDS outside
of Africa, and three-fourths of all malaria cases in South and Southeast Asia. Indians are less
likely to survive breast cancer than people in China or the United States, and more likely to
succumb to heart attacks at an early age.
Reasons that Indian morbidity and mortality statistics lag so far behind those of otherwise
comparable countries fall into three broad categories: access, quality, and patient experience.
— Access. The shortage of doctors and nurses is particularly acute in rural areas, where many
people find that the doctor nearest to them may be several kilometres away, a distance they
often must travel on foot, while ill. To rise to the global benchmark for the ratio of medical
practitioners to patients, India would need to add 6.5 million healthcare professionals, a
30 percent increase. Cost also inhibits patient access to care. Only 34 percent of Indians
had health insurance in 2017. High premiums put insurance out of reach for many people.
With more than 60 percent of healthcare expenditure coming out of pocket, many Indians
have to make tough trade-offs between healthcare and other necessities.139
— Quality. Even when patients are able to see doctors, outcomes are highly variable.
The provider market in India is extremely fragmented, and outcomes often are not
measured. Poor channels of communication can thwart the sharing of best practices
among doctors or prevent medical professionals from contacting patients to make sure
they are following recommended courses of treatment. A scarcity of specialists also
lowers quality of care where expertise is not widely available: by one estimate, the country
has fewer than one-fifth the number of cardiologists, paediatricians, and clinical
psychologists it requires.140
— Patient experience. Many patients, particularly in rural areas, are dissatisfied with
the service at their local healthcare provider and reluctant to return. For example, a
recent accountability study in Rajasthan, a rural state on the frontier with Pakistan in
northwest India, found that ten out of 33 districts scored zero out of a possible five in
patient satisfaction.141 Indians also have access to little information about the quality or
qualifications of doctors in their area, and they cannot be sure a physician will be available
even with an appointment: a nationally representative all-India survey found doctor
absenteeism exceeds 30 percent in some state-owned rural Primary Health Centres.142

Telemedicine consultations can be a cost-effective way to deliver
medical care, especially in rural areas
Telemedicine technology includes any digital communication between patients, doctors,
specialists, and clinical staff, whether via an HQ video link at a local Common Services Centre
or a discussion on a mobile phone. These remote consultations can be between patients and
nurses, midwives, or other clinical staff; directly between a patient and a doctor; or between
a doctor and a specialist.
Technology alone is not a replacement for care by doctors; while some ailments can be fully
treated remotely, telemedicine practices still need physical facilities where trained personnel
can perform procedures, take diagnostic images, and draw fluids for tests (Exhibit 26).
However, these virtual visits offer a cost-effective way to deliver medical care, particularly
in rural areas with relatively few hospitals and little or no physical access to specialists


The Project Gutenberg EBook of Heel, by Philip Jose Farmer

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll
have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using
this ebook.



Title: Heel

Author: Philip Jose Farmer

Release Date: December 7, 2019 [EBook #60871]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HEEL ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                                 HEEL                         By PHILIP JOSE FARMER                     _Great cast! Stupendous show!                     If this didn't make history,                         nothing ever would!_           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from                Worlds of If Science Fiction, May 1960.         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


"Call me Zeus," said the Director.

"Zeus?" said his wife, a beautiful woman not over a thousand years old.
"What an egomaniac! Comparing yourself to a god, even if he is the god
of those--those savages!"

She gestured at the huge screen on the wall. It showed, far below, the
blue sea, the black ships on the yellow beach, the purple tents of the
Greek army, the broad brown plain, and the white towers of Troy.

The Director glared at her through hexagonal dark glasses and puffed on
his cigar until angry green clouds rolled from it. His round bald head
was covered by a cerise beret, his porpoise frame by a canary yellow
tunic, and his chubby legs by iridescent green fourpluses.

"I may not look like a god, but as far as my power over the natives of
this planet goes, I could well be their deity," he replied.

He spoke sharply to a tall handsome blond youth who wore a crooked
smile and bright blue and yellow tattoo spiraling around his legs and
trunk. "Apollo, hand me the Script!"

"Surely you're not going to change the Script again?" said his wife.
She rose from her chair, and the scarlet web she was wearing translated
the shifting micro-voltages on the surface of her skin into musical
tones.

"I never change the Script," said the Director. "I just make the slight
revisions required for dramatic effects."

"I don't care what you do to it, just so you don't allow the Trojans to
win. I hate those despicable brutes."

Apollo laughed loudly, and he said, "Ever since she and Athena and
Aphrodite thought of that goofy stunt of asking Paris to choose the
most beautiful of the three, and he gave the prize to Aphrodite, Hera's
hated the Trojans. Really, Hera, why blame those simple, likable people
for the actions of only one of them? I think Paris showed excellent
judgment. Aphrodite was so grateful she contrived to get that lovely
Helen for Paris and--"

"Enough of this private feud," snapped the Director. "Apollo, I told
you once to hand me the Script."       *       *       *       *       *

Achilles at midnight paced back and forth before his tent. Finally, in
the agony of his spirit, he called to Thetis. The radio which had been
installed in his shield, unknown to him, transmitted his voice to a
cabin in the great spaceship hanging over the Trojan plain.

Thetis, hearing it, said to Apollo, "Get out of my cabin, you heel, or
I'll have you thrown out."

"Leave?" he said. "Why? So you can be with your barbarian lover?"

"He is not my lover," she said angrily. "But I'd take even a barbarian
as a lover before I'd have anything to do with you. Now, get out. And
don't speak to me again unless it's in the line of business."

"Any time I speak to you, I mean business," he said, grinning.

"Get out or I'll tell my father!"

"I hear and obey. But I'll have you, one way or another."

Thetis shoved him out. Then she quickly put on the suit that could bend
light around her to make her invisible and transport her through the
air and do many other things. Out of a port she shot, straight toward
the tent of her protégé. She did not decelerate until she saw him
standing tall in the moonlight, his hands still raised in entreaty. She
landed and cut the power off so he could see her.

"Mother, Mother!" cried Achilles. "How long must I put up with
Agamemnon's high-handedness?"

Thetis took him by the hand and led him into the tent. "Is Patroclos
around?" she asked.

"No, he is having some fun with Iphis, that buxom beauty I gave him
after I conquered the city of Scyros."

"There's a sensible fellow," said Thetis. "Why don't you forget this
fuss with King Agamemnon and have fun with some rosy-cheeked darling?"
But a painful expression crossed her face as she said it.

Achilles did not notice the look. "I am too sick with humiliation and
disgust to take pleasure in anything. I am full up to here with being a
lion in the fighting and yet having to give that jackal Agamemnon the
lion's share of the loot, just because he has been chosen to be our
leader. Am I not a king in Thessaly? I wish--I wish--"

"Yes?" said Thetis eagerly. "Do you want to go home?"

"I _should_ go home. Then the Greeks would wish they'd not allowed
Agamemnon to insult the best man among them."

"Oh, Achilles, say the word and I'll have you across the sea and in
your palace in an hour!" she said excitedly. She was thinking, _The
Director will be furious if Achilles disappears, but he won't be able
to do anything about it. And the Script can be revised. Hector or
Odysseus or Paris can play the lead role._       *       *       *       *       *

"No," Achilles said. "I can't leave my men here. They'd say I had run
out on them, that I was a coward. And the Greeks would call me a yellow
dog. No, I'll allow no man to say that."

Thetis sighed and answered sadly, "Very well. What do you want me to
do?"

"Go ask Zeus if he will give Agamemnon so much trouble he'll come
crawling to me, begging for forgiveness and pleading for my help."

Thetis had to smile. The enormous egotism of the beautiful brute!
Taking it for granted that the Lord of Creation would bend the course
of events so Achilles could salvage his pride. Yet, she told herself,
she need not be surprised. He had taken it calmly enough the night
she'd appeared to him and told him that she was a goddess and his true
mother. He had always been convinced divine blood ran in his veins. Was
he not superior to all men? Was he not Achilles?

"I will go to Zeus," she said. "But what he will do, only he knows."

She reached up and pulled his head down to kiss him on the forehead.
She did not trust herself to touch the lips of this man who was far
more a man than those he supposed to be gods. The lips she longed
for ... the lips soon to grow cold. She could not bear to think of it.

She flicked the switch to make her invisible and, after leaving the
tent, rose toward the ship. As always, it hung at four thousand feet
above the plain, hidden in the inflated plastic folds that simulated
a cloud. To the Greeks and Trojans the cloud was the home of Zeus,
anchored there so he could keep a close eye on the struggle below.

It was he who would decide whether the walls of Troy would stand or
fall. It was to him that both sides prayed.       *       *       *       *       *

The Director was drinking a highball in his office and working out the
details of tomorrow's shooting with his cameramen.

"We'll give that Greek Diomedes a real break, make him the big hero.
Get a lot of close-ups. He has a superb profile and a sort of flair
about him. It's all in the Script, what aristocrats he kills, how many
narrow escapes, and so on. But about noon, just before lunch, we'll
wound him. Not too badly, just enough to put him out of action. Then
we'll see if we can whip up a big tearjerker between that Trojan and
his wife--what's her name?"

He looked around as if he expected them to feed him the answer. But
they were silent; it was not wise to know more than he.

He snapped his fingers. "Andromache! That's it!"

"What a memory! How do you keep all those barbaric names at your
tongue's tip? Photographic!" and so on from the suckophants.

"O.K. So after Diomedes leaves the scene, you, Apollo, will put on a
simulacrum of Helenos, the Trojan prophet. As Helenos, you'll induce
Hector to go back to Troy and get his mother, the Queen, to pray for
victory. We can get some colorful shots of the temple and the local
religious rites. Meantime, we'll set up a touching domestic scene
between Hector and his wife. Bring in their baby boy. A baby's always
good for ohs and ahs. Later, after coffee break, we'll...."

Apollo drifted through the crowd toward the Director's wife. She was
sitting on a chair and moodily drinking. However, seeing Apollo, she
smiled with green-painted lips and said, "Do sit down, darling. You
needn't worry about my husband being angry because you're paying
attention to me. He's too busy shining down on his little satellites
to notice you."

Apollo seated himself in a chair facing her and moved forward so their
knees touched.

"What do you want now?" she said. "You only get lovey-dovey when you're
trying to get something out of me."

"You know I love only you, Hera," he said, grinning. "But I can't meet
you as often as I'd like. Old Thunder-and-Lightning is too suspicious.
And I value my job too much to risk it, despite my overwhelming passion
for you."

"Get to the point."

"We're way over our budget and past our deadline. The shooting should
have been finished six months ago. Yet Old Fussybritches keeps on
revising the Script and adding scene after scene. And that's not all.
We're not going home when Troy does fall. The Director is planning to
make a sequel. I know because he asked me to outline the Script for it.
He's got the male lead picked out. Foxy Grandpa Odysseus."       *       *       *       *       *

Hera sat upright so violently she sloshed her drink over the edge
of her glass. "Why, my brother means to kill Odysseus at the first
opportunity! My brother is mad, absolutely mad about Athena, but he
can't get to first base with her. She's got eyes only for Odysseus,
though how she could take up with one of those stupid primitives, I'll
never understand."

"Athena claims he has an intelligence equal to any of us," said Apollo.
"However, it's not her but Thetis I meant to discuss."

"Is my stepdaughter interfering again?"

"I think so. Just before this conference I saw her coming out of the
Director's room, tears streaming from her big cow eyes. I imagine she
was begging him again to spare Achilles. Or at least to allow the
Trojans to win for a while so Agamemnon will give back to Achilles the
girl he took from him, that tasty little dish, Briseis."

"You ought to know how tasty she is," said Hera bitterly. "I happen to
know you drugged Achilles several nights in a row and then put on his
simulacrum."

"A handy little invention, that simulacrum," said Apollo. "Put one on
and you can look like anybody you want to look like. Your jealousy is
showing, Hera. However, that's not the point. If Thetis keeps playing
on her father's sympathies like an old flute, this production will last
forever. Frankly, I'd like to shake the dust of this crummy planet from
my feet, get back to civilization before it forgets what a great script
writer I am."

"What do you propose?"

"I propose to hurry things up. Eventually, Achilles is supposed to
quit sulking and take up arms again. So far, the Director has been
indefinite on how we'll get him to do that. Well, we'll help him
without his knowing it. We'll fix it so the Trojans will beat the
Greeks even worse than the Director intends. Hector will almost run
them back into the sea. Agamemnon will beg Achilles to get back into
the ring. He'll give him back the loot he took from him, including
Briseis. And he'll offer his own daughter in marriage to Achilles.

"Achilles will refuse. But we'll have him all set up for the next
move. Tonight a technician will implant a post-hypnotic suggestion in
Achilles that he send his buddy Patroclos, dressed in Achilles' armor,
out to scare the kilts off the Trojans. We'll generate a panic among
the Trojans with a subsonic projector. Then we'll arrange it so Hector
kills Patroclos. That is the one thing to make Achilles so fighting mad
he'll quit sulking...."

"Patroclos? But the Director wants to save him for the big scene when
Achilles is knocked off. Patroclos is supposed to put Achilles' armor
on, storm the Scaian gate, and lead the Greeks right into the city."

"Accidents will happen," said Apollo. "Despite what the barbarians
think, we are not gods. Or are we? What do you say to my plan?"

"If the Director finds out we've tampered with the Script, he'll
divorce me. And you'll be blackballed in every studio from one end of
the Galaxy to the other."

Apollo winked and said, "I'll leave it to you to make Old Stupe think
Patroclos' death was his own idea. You have done something like that
before, and more than once."

She laughed and said, "Oh, Apollo, you're such a heel."

He rose. "Not a heel. Just a great script writer. Our plan will give me
a chance to kill Achilles much sooner than the Director expects. And
it'll all be for the good of the Script."       *       *       *       *       *

That night two technicians went into the Greek camp, one to Achilles'
tent and one to Agamemnon's. The technician assigned to the King of
Mycenae gave him a whiff of sleep gas and then taped two electrodes to
the royal forehead. It took him a minute to play a recording and two to
untape the electrodes and leave.

Five minutes later, the King awoke, shouting that Zeus had sent him a
dream in the shape of wise old Nestor. Nestor had told him to rouse the
camp and march forth even if it were only dawn, for today Troy would
fall and his brother Menelaos would get back his wife Helen.

Agamemnon, though, who had always been too clever for his own good,
told the council of elders that he wanted to test his army before
telling them the truth. He would announce that he was tired of this
war they could not win and that he wanted to go home. This news would
separate the slackers from the soldiers, his true friends from the
false.

Unfortunately, when he told this to the assemblage, he found far
less men of valor than he had expected. The entire army, with a few
exceptions, gave a big hurrah and stampeded toward the ships. They had
had a bellyful of this silly war, fighting to win back the beautiful
tart Helen for the King's brother, spilling their guts all over foreign
plains while their wives were undoubtedly playing them false with the
4-Fs, the fields were growing weeds, and their children were starving.

In vain, Agamemnon tried to stop the rush. He even shouted at them what
they had only guessed before, that more was at stake than his brother's
runaway wife. If Troy was crushed, the Greeks would own the trading
and colonizing routes to the rich Black Sea area. But no one paid any
attention to him. They were too concerned with knocking each other over
in their haste to get the ships ready to sail.

At this time, the only people from the spaceship on the scene
were some cameramen and technicians. They were paralyzed by the
unexpectedness of the situation, and they were afraid to use their
emotion-stimulating projectors. By the flick of a few switches
the panic could be turned into aggression. But it would have been
aggression without a leader. The Greeks, instead of automatically
turning to fight the Trojans, would have killed each other, sure that
their fellows were trying to stop them from embarking for home.

The technicians did not dare to waken the Director and acknowledge they
could not handle a simple mob scene. But one of them did put a call
through to one of the Director's daughters, Athena.

Athena zipped down to Odysseus and found him standing to one side,
looking glum. He had not panicked, but he also was not interfering.
Poor fellow, he longed to go home to Penelope. In the beginning of this
useless war, he had pretended madness to get out of being drafted. But,
once he had sworn loyalty to the King, he would not abandon him.

Athena flicked off her light-bender so he could see her. She shouted,
"Odysseus, don't just stand there like a lump on a bog! Do something or
all will be lost--the war, the honor of the Greeks, the riches you will
get from the loot of Troy! Get going!"

Odysseus, never at a loss, tore the wand of authority from the King's
numbed hand and began to run through the crowd. Everybody he met he
reproached with cowardice, and backed the sting of his words with the
hard end of the wand on their backs. Athena signaled to the technicians
to project an aggression-stimulating frequency. Now that the Greeks
had a leader to channel their courage, they could be diverted back to
fighting.

There was only one obstacle, Thersites. He was a lame hunchback with
the face of a baboon and a disposition to match.

Thersites cried out in a hoarse, jeering voice, "Agamemnon, don't you
have enough loot? Do you still want us to die so you may gather more
gold and beautiful Trojan women in your greedy arms? You Greeks, you're
not men. You're women who will do anything this disgrace to a crown
tells you to do. Look what he did to Achilles. Robbed him of Briseis
and in so doing robbed us of the best warrior we have. If I were
Achilles, I'd knock Agamemnon's head off."

"We've put up with your outrageous abuse long enough!" shouted
Odysseus. He began thwacking Thersites on the head and the back until
blood ran. "Shut up or I'll kill you!"

At this the whole army, which hated Thersites, roared with laughter.
Odysseus had relieved the tension; now they were ready to march under
Agamemnon's orders.

Athena sighed with relief and radioed back to the ship that the
Director could be awakened. Things were well in hand.       *       *       *       *       *

And so they were--until a few days later when Apollo and Hera, waiting
until the Director had gone to bed early with a hangover from the night
before, induced Hector to make a night attack. The fighting went on all
night, and at dawn Patroclos ran into Achilles' tent.

"Terrible news!" he cried. "The Trojans have breached the walls around
our ships and are burning them! Diomedes, Agamemnon, and Odysseus are
wounded. If you do not lead your men against Hector, all is lost!"

"Too bad," said Achilles. But the blood drained from his face.

"Don't be so hardhearted!" shouted Patroclos. "If you won't fight, at
least allow me to lead the Myrmidons against the enemy. Perhaps we can
save the ships and drive Hector off!"

Achilles shouted back, "Very well! You know I give you, my best friend,
anything you want. But I will not for all the gold in the world serve
under a king who robs me of prizes I took with my own sword. However, I
will give you my armor, and my men will march behind you!"

Then, sobbing with rage and frustration, he helped Patroclos dress in
his armor.

"Do you see this little lever in the back of the shield?" he said.
"When an enemy strikes at you, flick it this way. The air in front
of you will become hard, and your foe's weapon will bounce off the
air. Then, before he recovers from his confusion, flick the lever the
other way. The air will soften and allow your spear to pass. And the
spearpoint will shear through his armor as if it were cheese left in
the hot sun. It is made of some substance harder than the hardest
bronze made by the hand of man."

"So this is the magic armor your divine mother, Thetis, gave you," said
Patroclos. "No wonder--"

"Even without this magic--or force field, as Thetis calls it--I am
the best man among Greek or Trojan," said Achilles matter-of-factly.
"There! Now you are almost as magnificent as I am. Go forth in my
armor, Patroclos, and run the Trojans ragged. I will pray to Zeus that
you come back safely. There is one thing you must not do, though, no
matter how strong the temptation--do not chase the Trojans too close
to the city, even if you are on the heels of Hector himself. Thetis
has told me that Zeus does not want Troy to fall yet. If you were to
threaten it now, the gods would strike you down."

"I will remember," said Patroclos. He got into Achilles' chariot and
drove off proudly to take his place in front of the Myrmidons.       *       *       *       *       *

The Director was so red in the face, he looked as if his head were one
huge blood vessel.

"How in space did the Trojans get so far?" he screamed. "And what is
Patroclos doing in Achilles' armor? There's rank inefficiency here or
else skullduggery! Either one, heads will roll! And I think I know
whose! Apollo! Hera! What have you two been up to?"

"Why, Husband," said Hera, "how can you say I had anything to do with
this? You know how I hate the Trojans. As for Apollo, he thinks too
much of his job to go against the Script."

"All right, we'll see. We'll get to the bottom of this later.
Meanwhile, let's direct the situation so it'll end up conforming to the
Script."

But before the cameramen and technicians could be organized, Patroclos,
leading the newly inspired Greeks, slaughtered the Trojans as a lion
kills sheep. He could not be stopped, and when he saw Hector running
away from him, he forgot his friend's warning and pursued him to the
walls of Troy.

"Follow me!" yelled Patroclos to the Greeks. "We will break down the
gates and take the city within an hour!"       *       *       *       *       *

It was then Apollo projected fury into Hector so that he turned to
battle the man he thought was Achilles. And Apollo, timing to coincide
with the instant that Patroclos flicked off his force field, struck
him a stunning blow from behind. At the same time a spear thrown by a
Trojan wounded Patroclos in the back. Dazed, hurt, the Greek started
back toward his men. But Hector ran up and stabbed him through the
belly, finding no resistance to his spear because Patroclos had not
turned the force field back on. Patroclos hit the ground with a crash
of armor.

"No, no, you fool, Apollo!" shouted the Director into the radio. "He
must not die! We need him later for the Script. You utter fool, you've
bumbled!"

Thetis, who had been standing behind the Director, burst into tears and
ran into her cabin.

"What's the matter with her?" asked the Director.

"You may as well know, darling," said Hera, "that your daughter is in
love with a barbarian."

"Thetis? In love with Patroclos? Impossible!"

Hera laughed and said, "Ask her how she feels about the planned death
of Achilles. That is whom she is weeping for, not Patroclos. She
foresees Achilles' death in his friend's. And I imagine she will go to
comfort her lover, knowing his grief when he hears that Patroclos is
dead."

"That's ridiculous! If she's in love with Achilles, why would she tell
Achilles she is his mother?"

"For the very reason she loves him but doesn't want him to know. She at
least has sense enough to realize no good could come from a match with
one of those Earth primitives. So she stopped any passes from him with
that maternal bit. If there is one thing the Greeks respect, it is the
incest taboo."

"I'll have him knocked off as soon as possible. Thetis might lose her
head and tell him the truth. Poor little girl, she's been away from
civilization too long. We'll have to wind up this picture and get back
to God's planet."

Hera watched him go after Thetis and then switched to a private
channel. "Apollo, the Director is very angry with you. But I've thought
of a way to smooth his feathers. We'll tell him that killing Patroclos
was the only way to get Achilles back into the fight. He'll like that.
Achilles can then be slain, and the picture will still be saved. Also,
I'll make him think it was his idea."

"That's great," replied Apollo, his voice shaky with dread of the
Director. "But what can we do to speed up the shooting? Patroclos was
supposed to take the city after Achilles was killed."

"Don't worry," said Athena, who had been standing behind Hera.
"Odysseus is your man. He's been working on a device to get into the
city. Barbarian or not, that fellow is the smartest I've ever met. Too
bad he's an Earthman."       *       *       *       *       *

During the next twenty-four hours, Thetis wept much. But she was also
very busy, working while she cried. She went to Hephaistos, the chief
technician, an old man of five thousand years. He loved Thetis because
she had intervened for Hephaistos more than once when her father had
been angry with him. Yet he shook his head when she asked him if he
could make Achilles another suit of armor, even more invulnerable than
the first.

"Not enough time. Achilles is to be killed tomorrow."

"No. My father has cooled off a little. He remembered that the Script
calls for Achilles to kill Hector before he himself dies. Besides, the
government anthropologist wants to take films of the funeral games for
Patroclos. And he overrules even Father, you know."

"That'll give me a week," said Hephaistos, figuring on his fingers. "I
can do it. But tell me, child, why all the tears? Is it true what they
say, that you love a barbarian, that magnificent red-haired Achilles?"

"I love him," she said, weeping again.

"Ah, child, you are a mere hundred years or so. When you reach my age,
you'll know that there are few things worth tears, and love between
man and woman is not one of them. However, I'll make the armor. And
its field of force will cover everything around him except an opening
to the outside air. Otherwise, he'd suffocate. But what good will all
this do? The Director will find some means of killing him. And even if
Achilles should escape, you'd be no better off."

"I will," she said. "We'll go to Italy--and I'll give him perpetuol."

Thetis went to her cabin. Shortly afterward, the doorbell rang. She
opened the door and saw Apollo.

Smiling, he said, "I have something here you might be interested in
hearing." He held in his hand a small cartridge.

Seeing it, her eyes widened in surprise.

"Yes, it's a recording," he said, and he pushed past her into the
room. "Let me put it in your playback."

"You don't have to," she replied. "I presume you had a microphone
planted in Hephaistos' cabin?"

"Correct. Won't your father be angry if somebody sends him a note
telling him you're planning to ruin the Script by running off to Italy
with a barbarian? And not only that but inject perpetuol into the
barbarian to increase his life span? Personally, if I were your father,
I'd let you do it. You'd soon grow sick of your handsome but uncouth
booby."

Thetis did not answer.

"I really don't care," he said. "In fact, I'll help you. I can arrange
it so the arrow that hits Achilles' heel will be a trick one. Its head
will just seem to sink into his flesh. Inside it will be a needle that
will inject a cataleptic agent. Achilles will seem to be dead but will
actually be in a state of suspended animation. We'll sneak his body at
night from the funeral pyre and substitute a corpse. A bio-tech who
owes me a favor will fix up the face of a dead Trojan or Greek to look
like Achilles'. When this epic is done and we're ready to leave Earth,
you can run away. We'll not miss you until we're light-years away."

"And what do you want in return for arranging all this? My thanks?"

"I want you."

Thetis flinched. For a moment she stood with her eyes closed and her
hands clenched. Then, opening her eyes, she said, "All right. I know
that is the only way open for me. It's also the only way you could have
devised to have me. But I want to tell you that I loathe and despise
you. And I'll be hating every atom of your flesh while you're in
possession of mine."

He chuckled and said, "I know it. But your hate will only make me
relish you the more. It'll be the sauce on the salad."

"Oh, you heel!" she said in a trembling voice. "You dirty, sneaking,
miserable, slimy heel!"

"Agreed." He picked up a bottle and poured two drinks. "Shall we toast
to that?"       *       *       *       *       *

Hector's death happened, as planned, and the tear-jerking scene in
which his father, King Priam, came to beg his son's body from Achilles.
Four days later, Achilles led the attack on the Scaian gate. It was
arranged that Paris should be standing on the wall above the gate.
Apollo, invisible behind him, would shoot the arrow that would strike
Achilles' foot if Paris' arrow bounced off the force field.

Apollo spoke to Thetis, who was standing beside him. "You seem very
nervous. Don't worry. You'll see your lovely warrior in Italy in a few
weeks. And you can explain to him that you aren't his mother, that you
had to tell him that to protect him from the god Apollo's jealousy. But
now that Zeus has raised him from the dead, you have been given to him
as a special favor. And all will end happily. That is, until living
with him will become so unbearable you'd give a thousand years off your
life to leave this planet. Then, of course, it'll be too late. There
won't be another ship along for several millennia."

"Shut up," she said. "I know what I'm doing."

"So do I," he said. "Ah, here comes the great hero Achilles, chasing a
poor Trojan whom he plans to slaughter. We'll see about that."

He lifted the airgun in whose barrel lay the long dart with the trick
head. He took careful aim, saying, "I'll wait until he goes to throw
his spear. His force field will be off.... Now!"

Thetis gave a strangled cry. Achilles, the arrow sticking from the
tendon just above the heel, had toppled backward from the chariot onto
the plain, where dust settled on his shining armor. He lay motionless.

"Oh, that was an awful fall," she moaned. "Perhaps he broke his neck.
I'd better go down there and see if he's all right."

"Don't bother," said Apollo. "He's dead."

Thetis looked at him with wide brown eyes set in a gray face.

"I put poison on the needle," said Apollo, smiling crookedly at her.
"That was my idea, but your father approved of it. He said I'd redeemed
my blunder in killing Patroclos by telling him what you planned. Of
course, I didn't inform him of the means you took to insure that I
would carry out my bargain with you. I was afraid your father would
have been very shocked to hear of your immoral behavior."

Thetis choked out, "You unspeakable ... vicious ... vicious ... you ...
you...."

"Dry your pretty tears," said Apollo. "It's all for your own good. And
for Achilles', too. The story of his brief but glorious life will be a
legend among his people. And out in the Galaxy the movie based on his
career will become the most stupendous epic ever seen."       *       *       *       *       *

Apollo was right. Four thousand years later, it was still a tremendous
box-office attraction. There was talk that now that Earth was civilized
enough to have space travel, it might even be shown there.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Heel, by Philip Jose Farmer

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HEEL ***

***** This file should be named 60871-8.txt or 60871-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/0/8/7/60871/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:    Dr. Gregory B. Newby    Chief Executive and Director    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


The Project Gutenberg EBook of Bewick's Select Fables, by Thomas Bewick

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Bewick's Select Fables       of Æsop and others.

Author: Thomas Bewick

Contributor: Oliver Goldsmith
Edwin Pearson

Release Date: December 7, 2019 [EBook #60874]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BEWICK'S SELECT FABLES ***




Produced by Chris Curnow and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)










BEWICK’S SELECT FABLES.
                            “Is not the earth  With various living creatures, and the air  Replenished, and all those at thy command  To come and play before thee? Knowest thou not  Their language and their ways? They also know,  And reason not contemptibly: with these  Find pastime.”—_Paradise Lost_, b. viii. l. 370. 

_The above appeared on the titles of both the 1776 and 1784 editions of_
“SELECT FABLES,” _T. Saint, Newcastle-upon-Tyne_.


 


                         Bewick’s Select Fables                          _OF ÆSOP AND OTHERS_.                             In Three Parts.                  _I. FABLES EXTRACTED FROM DODSLEY’S._            _II. FABLES WITH REFLECTIONS IN PROSE AND VERSE._                         _III. FABLES IN VERSE._                          TO WHICH ARE PREFIXED               _THE LIFE OF ÆSOP, AND AN ESSAY UPON FABLE                          BY OLIVER GOLDSMITH._     _Faithfully Reprinted from the Rare Newcastle Edition published                          by T. SAINT in 1784._           With the Original Wood Engravings by Thomas Bewick,                                 AND AN                  Illustrated Preface by Edwin Pearson.                                                               LONDON:                 BICKERS & SON, 1 LEICESTER SQUARE, W.C.                    PRINTED BY BALLANTYNE AND COMPANY                          EDINBURGH AND LONDON




[Illustration: Thomas Bewick

_Engraver on Wood._

_Jaˢ. Ramsay Pinxᵗ._ _Henry Hoppner Meyer Sculpᵗ._]


 




PREFACE TO 1871 EDITION.


In the various periods of the world’s history men have appeared who were
gifted with greater powers of mind and intelligence than the majority
of the people in whose age they lived, who, by becoming the preceptors
or teachers of the masses, evidently fulfilled the designs of the
Creator, by promoting civilisation and happiness, by unity of thought and
knowledge. Such men were Æsop, William Shakespeare, Fielding, Scott, and
many others, and later, in our own time, Thackeray and Charles Dickens.
One of the most ancient and interesting methods of conveying instruction
was by the art of Fable, Allegory, or Parable.

Fable is an ingenious method of conveying advice and instruction, without
seeming so to do, by a diverting little narrative, which, attracting
attention, irresistibly chains it till the moral is imperceptibly
rooted in the mind, there to influence, for the _better_ it may be,
all future actions of importance. _Æsop_ was, and _is_, the most
favourite of Fabulists, of whom a fair and goodly succession have since
appeared; but still _he_ maintains, and will continue to maintain the
foremost place in literature as a writer of instructive and entertaining
Fables. We here reprint an edition comparatively unknown in the present
generation, illustrated by the graver of Bewick, and arranged by the pen
of Goldsmith. Bewick and Goldsmith’s _early_ works are _comparatively_
unknown to the literary and reading world. We all know that Bewick
_designed_ and _engraved_ the inimitable “British Quadrupeds,” “Birds,”
“Fables,” &c., and that Goldsmith wrote the “Vicar of Wakefield,”
“Traveller,” “Deserted Village,” &c., but what do we know of their
_early_ works—the _progressive steps_ by which they attained their
wondrous and _well-earned_ celebrity? It has been the pleasing pursuit of
the writer (for some years) to search for, and rescue from destruction
and oblivion, all possible _early_ works of Bewick and Goldsmith. The
result has exceeded his most sanguine expectations. He has discovered at
least _twenty_ little works written by Goldsmith during his _weary_ hours
of adversity, all bearing _strong_ internal evidence of the author’s
mind and style. (A work on this subject is preparing for the press,
profusely illustrated with original woodcuts, &c.) The early editions of
the _present_ work were printed by T. Saint, of Newcastle-upon-Tyne.
We will here give a very brief _resumé_ of Bewick’s _earliest_ works
(published by Saint), with a few woodcuts from the _original_ blocks,
thus illustrating the _progressive_ _stages_ of pictorial fine art by
which Thomas Bewick succeeded in producing the wood-engravings which
embellish the _present volume_, of which (edit. 1784) Jackson, in his
work on wood-engraving (1861, p. 480), says:—

“He (Bewick) evidently improved as his talents were exercised; for the
cuts in the “Select Fables,” 1784, are generally much superior to those
in “Gay’s Fables,” 1779. The animals are better drawn and engraved;
the sketches of landscape in the backgrounds are more natural; and the
engraving of the foliage of the trees and bushes is not unfrequently
scarce inferior to that of his later productions.”

Jackson gives _three_ examples of these Fable cuts in his work, at pp.
480, 503 (“Wood-Engravings,” 1861). Thomas Bewick was apprenticed to
R. Beilby, October 1, 1767. It is probable that the cuts given in next
page are among the _very first_ engraved by Thomas Bewick during his
apprenticeship, and were used in “A New Invented Horn Book,” also in
“Battledores,” “Primers,” and “Reading Easies.” He then executed the
diagrams for Hutton on Mensuration, 4to, 1770. One of the cuts is given
in “Jackson” (p. 475), a representation of St Nicholas’ celebrated
steeple. This is the first _known_ pictorial attempt of Bewick’s.

[Illustration: “Horn Book” Cuts.] 

[Illustration: Facsimile of Bewick’s cut, St. Nicholas’ Steeple,
Newcastle, 1770.]

No doubt coarse cuts were done by Bewick about this time for _local_
Ballads, Broadsides, Garlands, and Histories.

The next recognised work _I discovered myself_, the “New Lottery-Book of
Birds and Beasts, for Children to learn their Letters by, as soon as they
can speak” (Saint, 1771, 32mo, bds. and gilt). Two of the cuts follow. 

The “Child’s Tutor” (Saint, 1772-73, square 24mo), cuts, with _verses_,
&c., by Oliver Goldsmith. The following is undoubtedly by the Poet’s
hand:—“The Lilliputian Magazine; or, the Young Gentleman and Lady’s
Golden Library, being an attempt to mend the World, to render the Society
of Man more amiable, and to establish the Plainness, Simplicity, Virtue,
and Wisdom of the Golden Age, so much celebrated by the Poets and
Historians—  ‘Man in that age no rule but Reason knew,  And with a native bent did Good pursue;  Unforc’d by Punishment, unaw’d by Fear,  His Words were Simple and his Soul Sincere.’”

(T. Saint, _circa_ 1772, _early_ Bewick woodcuts, 144 pp. 24mo.) The
verse and title bear the _undoubted impress_ of his genius and style.
Oliver Goldsmith wrote it for J. Newbery, of London, but, as I shall show
in my larger work on this subject, there was an arrangement between them
by which Saint reprinted many of his (Newbery’s) little books for the
North-Country trade. We then have “Moral Instructions of a Father to his
Son,” comprehending the whole system of Morality, &c., &c.; and “Select
Fables,” extracted from Dodsley, and others, _adorned with emblematical_
cuts, 12mo, T. Saint, Newcastle, 1772 and 1775. This, then, is one of the
_first_ works of Saint’s we have seen containing cuts of Fables.

Having a doubt respecting the cuts of this rare book, I took my
copy to Miss Bewick (Jan. 1867), and inquired of her if they _were_
engraved by her father. She kindly gave me the following _authentic
information_:—“The cuts _were_ engraved by Thomas Bewick in the first
year of his apprenticeship (1767-68), excepting the cut of a ship at sea,
p. 167. This was engraved by David Martin, Bewick’s fellow-apprentice,
Bewick at this time disliking to represent ‘water.’” This, then, sets all
doubt at rest respecting the cuts in an “Æsop’s Fables,” “Gay’s Fables,”
&c., &c., published by Saint about this date, in which the _same_ and
similar cuts were used. The following, used in “Gay,” is evidently
Bewick’s first attempt at the subject for which he afterwards gained a
premium.

[Illustration: “Moral Instructions,” 1772, and “Select Fables,” 1776.] 

[Illustration: “Select Fables,” Æsop, &c. (Saint, 1776).]

The next is the _first_ edition of the _present volume_, “Select Fables”
(T. Saint, Newcastle, 1776). In three Parts. Part I. After the Manner of
Dodsley’s. Part II. Fables with Reflections. Part III. Fables in Verse.
To which are prefixed the Life of Æsop; and An Essay upon Fable—(_same
Verse and Vignette, as in the 2d Edition, of 1784_). Containing one
hundred and fourteen cuts, _including_ those mentioned in the “Moral
Instructions,” _described above_, and fourteen larger and much superior
cuts, _with borders_, afterwards used with others in “Gay’s Fables,”
printed by T. Saint, in 1779. The same vignette appears on the title as
in the Second Edition of this Book in 1784. It also has a copperplate
frontispiece, “R. Beilby delint. et sculpt.” 12mo, 211 pages, 2 pages
of Index, &c. (notice the _variations_ in the _title_, &c., to the 1784
edition). The only copy of this edition (1776) I ever had, or saw, is now
in the unique collection of E. B. Jupp, Esq., who has kindly lent the
block for the Frontispiece to the present Edition. It was engraved for
“The Beauties of Æsop” (Kendal, _circa_ 1800-22), by Thomas Bewick, and
is somewhat like Beilby’s copperplate frontispiece to 1776 Edition, but
infinitely _improved_. It contains about seventy delineations of animal
and bird life, &c. (see the tailpiece at page 122 of _present_ edition,
extremely like in arrangement, execution, &c.), while the portrait of
Æsop is certainly the most _reasonable_ I have yet seen in examining the
_numerous_ editions which have passed through my hands.

About this time, 1773 to 1776, many works issued from Saint’s
press—“Robinson Crusoe,” “Watt’s Songs,” Oliver Goldsmith’s “Tommy Trip”
(see my reprint, of 1867), “Goody Two Shoes,” “Golden Toy or Fairing,”
“Tom Telescope’s Newtonian Philosophy,” “Tommy Tagg’s Poems,” and
_numerous_ others. Examples of cuts follow.

[Illustration: Similar to “Tommy Trip” series of Cuts.]

[Illustration: “Tommy Two Shoes.”]

[Illustration: “Adventures of a Kitten.”]

[Illustration: “Holy Bible in Miniature.”]

[Illustration: “Memoirs of a Peg-Top.”]

[Illustration: “Poetical Fabulator.”]

[Illustration: A New Edition of “Tommy Tagg,” with sixty cuts, will
shortly be printed. (Specimen of the Woodcuts.)]

[Illustration: “The Concert of Birds,” from “Tommy Tagg.”]

[Illustration: “Story-Teller.”]

We now reach a period to which Bewick himself thus refers at pages 59,
60 of his “Memoirs” (Longman, 1862):—“We were occasionally applied to by
(local) printers to execute woodcuts for them.... Orders were received
for cuts for Children’s Books, chiefly for Thomas Saint, printer,
Newcastle, and successor of John White, who had rendered himself famous
for his numerous publications of histories and old ballads.... My time
now became greatly taken up with designing and cutting a set of wood
blocks for the ‘Story-Teller,’ ‘Gay’s Fables,’ and ‘Select Fables,’
together with cuts of a similar kind for printers.” 

The following are among those referred to by Bewick:—“Youth’s Instructive
and Entertaining Story-Teller, being a Choice Collection of Moral Tales,
Chiefly deduced from real Life, calculated to enforce the Practice of
Virtue, and expand every social Idea in the Human heart. Adorned with
emblematical cuts from the most interesting part of each Tale, and
methodised after the Plan recommended by the late ingenious Dr Goldsmith.
To which is added, by way of Preface, Thoughts on the Present Mode of
Education.” (Newcastle, T. Saint.) Three Editions, _circa_ 1774-7-8,
12mo, thirty-seven woodcuts. The cuts in this book are larger than any
in the preceding books. We give the cut at page 48 of a Shipwrecked
Sailor kneeling on a rock saying his prayers, the tide rising around
him, which is the _first and earliest_ engraving of this subject by T.
Bewick, afterwards one of his favourite Vignettes in the “British Birds.”
The others are all about the size of the cuts in “Gay’s Fables,” 1779, or
“Select Fables,” 1784, and have similar borders.

[Illustration: “Bob Easy.”]

[Illustration: “The Huntsman and Old Hound.”]

“Jackson” refers to this and the following two works:—“Gay’s Fables.”
Fables by the late Mr Gay, in One Volume complete, Newcastle, printed by
and for T. Saint, 1779, 12mo, _77 cuts of Fables, with borders and 33
Vignettes_; for the tasteful and clever engraving of five of the cuts
(one, the Huntsman and Old Hound[1]) the Royal Society of Arts presented
Bewick with their medal; _it is further embellished with a beautifully
engraved Frontispiece, by R. Beilby_ (T. Saint, Newcastle, 1779). We
give an impression of the _original_ wood-engraving, exceedingly
interesting, as now Bewick seems to have received the required impetus or
encouragement to produce the engravings for “Select Fables,” T. Saint,
1784. In three parts. Part I. Fables extracted from Dodsley’s; Part II.
Fables, with Reflections in Prose and Verse; Part III. Fables in Verse;
to which are prefixed the Life of Æsop, and an Essay upon Fable, A New
Edition Improved. For this edition a _new set of cuts_ was engraved by
Thomas Bewick. “These cuts were then deemed superior to any of Bewick’s
previous productions.” The same year another impression of this work
was printed with the same title page, but considerable variations in
the letterpress, and vignettes occur at pages 122, 125, and 152, which
are not in the former edition, printed in 1784, 12mo. This is the book
we now reprint (Saint’s collection of Bewick’s blocks having passed
into my hands.) An original copy of the 1784 edition in fine state is so
rare, that a copy has realised, at auction, £7, 10s. Bewick says (p. 60,
“Memoir,” 1862): “Some of the Fable (“Gay,” 1779) cuts were thought so
much of by my master (Beilby), that he, in my name, sent impressions of a
few of them to be laid before the Society for the Encouragement of Arts,
&c., and I obtained a premium.” (Seven guineas, which he took intense
pleasure in presenting to his mother.) We have thus, by easy stages,
travelled through the various phases of talent, to the most important
work produced before his _well-known_ “British Quadrupeds,” first
published 1790; “British Birds,” 1797, 1804; and his _large_ edition of
“Æsop’s Fables,” 1818 (each work embellished with his inimitable and
ever-pleasing vignettes). Examples from all these works follow.

[Illustration: “The Chillingham Wild Bull.”—Bewick’s _large_ engraving of
this subject, with border, has realised twenty guineas. _See_ “Jackson on
Wood-Engraving.”]

[Illustration: British Quadrupeds.]

[Illustration: Vignette to “Quadrupeds.”]

[Illustration: “Select Fables,” 1820, Charnley’s Edition, 8vo, and in
early Children’s Books (Saint, Newcastle).]

[Illustration: Intended for “Bewick’s British Birds”—“Chimney Swallow,”
injured and rejected.]

[Illustration: Facsimile of Bewick’s Skylark.]

[Illustration: Vignette to “Birds.”—Angler and Sportsman.]

[Illustration: Engraved for “Bewick’s Æsop,” 1818, unfinished and
rejected.]

[Illustration: Vignette to “Æsop.”]

These remarks are rapidly written, but they are the result of years
of research and study: so that the reader of this Preface has a brief
_resumé_ of Bewick’s talents from his _earliest efforts_ to his most
finished productions; a _result_ which no one living is able to give from
the _original woodcuts_ but myself; thus forming a most useful manual or
pictorial _aid_ to connoisseurs in selecting _early_ works illustrated by
“Bewick,” the more _valuable_, as scarcely any of the works mentioned as
published by Saint are in the British Museum.

Now, as to the “Goldsmith” interest as connected with this work, the
1776 Newcastle edition was evidently copied from “Dodsley’s” and other
editions of “Select Fables of Æsop” published in London prior to this
period. In the meantime, J. Newbery and others, for whom Goldsmith wrote
prefaces and arranged and edited books, had published new editions, so
that when Saint went to press with “A New Edition Improved” (with a new
set of cuts by the Bewicks), evidently the book was remodelled and
extended from one that Goldsmith had just edited. In Dodsley’s Preface
to his Fables, he says “he has been assisted in it by gentlemen of the
most distinguished abilities; and that several, both of the old and the
new Fables, are not written by himself, but by authors with whom it is
an honour to be connected.” Dodsley also refers to the Life of Æsop,
&c., as being written by “a learned and ingenious friend.” Doubtless Dr
Johnson and Goldsmith were the “authors,” and Goldsmith the “friend,”
here referred to. Be that as it may, the present work bears sufficient
internal evidence in the “Essay on Fable,” the “Poetical Applications,”
and the “Fables in Verse,” that Oliver Goldsmith was the author; for it
is identical in style with numerous prefaces and essays written about
this period by Oliver Goldsmith for Newbery, Dodsley, Griffiths, and
others. Much conclusive evidence on this interesting subject will be
given in my new book on “The early works of Bewick and Goldsmith” (a
Prospectus of which will shortly be issued). The applications to this
edition are infinitely superior to any edition which had appeared prior
to its publication. In Sir Roger L’Estrange and Croxall’s editions, the
applications were warped away from their original and intended effect
by political distortions and obsolete terms, which often strayed far
from, instead of assisting, the subject. It is somewhat refreshing,
then, in the edition here reprinted, to meet with some applications
which are everything that could be desired, in easy, naturally flowing,
and apt language, just to the point; and who was so much a master of
such language as Oliver Goldsmith?—of whom Dr Johnson said, “He left
no species of writing unadorned.” It may be interesting here to quote
from Bewick’s Memoir of himself (not published till 1862), his opinion
of this book, which at once justifies the parent, preceptor, or friend,
in selecting this as a most _suitable_ present for the young of both
sexes; he says (pages 172-3):—“I was extremely fond of that book (‘Æsop’s
Fables’); and as it had afforded me much pleasure, I thought, with better
executed designs, it would impart the same kind of delight to others that
I had experienced from attentively reading it. I was also of opinion,
that it had (while admiring the cuts) led hundreds of young men into the
paths of wisdom and rectitude, and in that way had materially assisted
the pulpit.”

The lessons intended to be conveyed through the medium of Fable are
certainly plainer and easier to be understood in this edition than in
the once popular “Croxall;” and the publishers believe, therefore, that
the book in its present form will be found a powerful auxiliary in the
important practical feeling for the education of the rising generation,
illustrated as it is by the early but forcible and natural rendering of
these Fables by the inimitable Bewick, through the medium of which is
imparted the profound good sense, wisdom, and experience of the ancient
philosophers. I have already exceeded the limits of an ordinary Preface.
On a future occasion I will endeavour to show how _coincidently_ Bewick
and Goldsmith worked together to produce results—the importance of which
can scarcely be fully estimated. I will now conclude with one of those
exquisite little pictures of nature that will never cease to exhibit the
true art of pleasing as long as “the language of England is spoken, or
her literature cultivated.”                                                           EDWIN PEARSON.   “Say, should the philosophic mind disdain  That good, which makes each humble bosom vain?  Let school-taught pride dissemble all it can,  These _little things_ are great to _little man_.”


 




THE LIFE OF ÆSOP.


Æsop, according to the best accounts, was a native of Phrygia, a province
of the _Lesser Asia_, and born in the city Cotiæum.[2] He was a person
of a remarkable genius, and extraordinary character; for though he was
born a slave, by the assistance of his _genius_ and _virtue only_, he
procured his own emancipation. By his sage counsels and judicious advice
he directed his countrymen to measures that secured their liberty, and
by a single Fable baffled the tyrannical projects of Crœsus, King of
Lydia. The most part of writers agree that his person was but unseemly,
though there are some of a contrary opinion.[3] It is probable that he
was of a low and diminutive stature, though agreeable in his complexion,
and polite in his manners. It is, however, certain that he had a great
soul, and was endowed with extraordinary mental qualifications; his
moral character approached to a degree of perfection to which very few
have attained. He appears to have had a true sense of morality, and a
just discernment of right and wrong; his perceptions and feelings of
truth were scrupulously nice, and the smallest deviation from rectitude
impressed his mind with the greatest antipathy. No considerations of
private interest could warp his inclinations so as to seduce him from
the paths of virtue; his principles were stedfast and determined, and
truly habitual. He never employed his great wisdom to serve the purposes
of cunning; but, with an uncommon exactness, made his understanding a
servant to truth. Historians have given many instances of his wit and
shrewdness, which were always employed in the service of _virtue_,
_philanthropy_, and _benevolence_.

It cannot well be ascertained who were his parents, though some have
affirmed that his father was a shepherd.[4] He himself was undoubtedly
a slave; his first master was an Athenian, whose name was Caresias.
At Athens he learned the Greek language in perfection, and acquired a
taste for writing moral instructions, in the way of Fables, which was
then the prevailing mode of teaching morals in Attica. His Fables are
allegorical stories, delivered with an air of fiction, under various
personifications, to convey truth to the mind in an agreeable manner. By
telling a story of a _Lion_, _Dog_, or a _Wolf_, the Fabulist describes
the manners and characters of men, and communicates instruction without
seeming to assume the authority of a master or a pedagogue. Æsop’s
situation as a slave might suggest this method to him; for what would
have been scornfully rejected if delivered in an authoritative style by
a slave, was received with avidity in the form of a fable.

Æsop had several masters; his second master was Xanthus, in whose service
he discovered great wisdom and sagacity in answering questions, and
reconciling differences. By the following stratagem he made his master’s
wife return back, after she had run away and left him, and effectually
reconciled them: our Fabulist, then a slave, went to the market, and
bought a great quantity of the best provisions, which he publicly
declared were intended for the marriage of his master with a new spouse.
This report had its desired effect, and the matter was amicably composed.
The story of his feast of _Neat Tongrege_, and his answer to a gardener,
are scarcely worthy of relating. At a feast made on purpose to celebrate
the return of his master’s wife, he is said to have served the guests
with several courses of tongues, by which he intended to give a moral
lesson to his master and mistress, who had by the too liberal use of
their tongues occasioned the difference which was now agreed.

The third master of Æsop was Idmon, who was surnamed the wise. Idmon was
an inhabitant of the island of Samos. During Æsop’s servitude with this
master, he had a fellow-servant called Rhodopis, who some affirm was his
wife.[5] This does not at all appear credible, for there is no mention
made of this among the Greek writers. This Rhodopis became afterwards
very famous for her riches, and was celebrated all over Greece. Idmon
is said to have been so well pleased with Æsop, that after he had been
some time in his service, he emancipated him, and made him free. With the
enjoyment of liberty, he acquired new reputation, and became celebrated
for his wisdom. He is by some compared to the Seven Sages of Greece,
and accounted their equal in wisdom. He had the honour to be acquainted
with Solon and Chilo, and was equally admitted with them in the Court
of Periander, the King of the Corinthians, who was himself one of the
Sages of Greece. He was much esteemed by Crœsus, King of Lydia, and
received into his Court at Sardis. During his residence at Sardis, he
gave proofs of his sagacity which astonished the courtiers of Crœsus.
This ambitious Prince having one day shewn his wise men his vast riches
and magnificence, and the glory and splendour of his court, asked them
the question, whom they thought the happiest man? After several different
answers given by all the wise men present, it came at last to Æsop to
make his reply, who said: _That Crœsus was as much happier than other
men as the fulness of the sea was superior to the rivers._ Whether this
was spoken ironically or in earnest does not appear so evident; but
according to the severe morality of Æsop, it would rather appear to be
a sarcasm, though it was otherwise understood by the King, and received
as the greatest compliment. It wrought so much upon his vanity, that he
exclaimed: _The Phrygian had hit the mark._ One thing which renders it
probable that Æsop flattered Crœsus on this occasion is his conversation
with Solon, who at this time departed from the court of the King of
Lydia. When they were upon the road, Æsop exclaims: _O Solon! either we
must not speak to Kings, or we must say what will please them._ Solon
replied: _We should either not speak to Kings at all, or we should give
them good advice, and speak truth._ This seems to be one instance in
which Æsop is charged with flattery and dissimulation. Some writers
praise him for his complaisance to so great a Prince; but it is rather
a proof of his policy than his ordinary strictness and integrity. There
is another instance recorded by some writers of the life of Æsop, of his
complaisance to Princes, even contrary to the liberties of the people.
He is said to have written a Fable in favour of the tyrant Pisistratus,
which Phædrus has translated, and proves that he was reconciled to
tyranny. But this is no way evident. There are many Fables which are
mingled with those of Æsop, which are not his, yet have been fathered
upon him; and it is not consistent with the other parts of his character
and writings to suppose that he would either flatter tyrants or defend
them. The authorities from whence these supposed facts are taken are not
to be depended upon.

In all other particulars he appears to have proceeded upon the principles
of wisdom, as far as any of the Sages of Greece. When he was asked by
Chilo, one of the wise men, _What God was doing?_ He replied, with great
adroitness, _That he was humbling the proud and exalting the humble._
He had just views of human nature, and assigned true reasons for
all its Phænomena. In an account of the paintings in the time of the
Antonines, Philostratus informs us, that there is one of Æsop which makes
a principal figure. The painter represents him before his own house,
with the geniuses approaching him with a sort of adulating pleasure as
the inventor of Fables: they are painted as adorning him with wreaths
and chaplets of flowers, and crowning him with olive branches. His
countenance appears in a smiling attitude, while his eyes seem fixed
towards the ground, as if composing a Fable, with the same gaiety and
good humour with which he usually wrote. There is a group of men and
beasts placed around him, and amongst the rest the Fox, which makes a
capital figure, as he does in the Fables. This picture does not represent
Æsop in a decrepit form, but sets him forth with a mixture of gravity
and good humour. The image of his mind is well drawn by Plutarch in his
_Feast of the Sages at the court of Periander_, who himself was one of
the Seven. It was at this feast that Æsop repeats his Fable of _The Wolf
and the Shepherds_, to shew that the company were guilty of the same
fault. From Plutarch’s account it is manifest that Æsop’s conversation
was pleasant and witty, but yet delicate. He was satirical without
disobliging, and the poignancy of his wit was smoothed with good nature
and good sense.

The writer of his life prefixed to Dodsley’s Fables compares him to Dean
Swift, but with very little propriety; for he has a delicacy in all his
wit which the Dean of St Patrick’s was a total stranger to; and, what is
more strange, he had nearly as much Christianity.

It has been doubted if he was the inventor of Fables; but it is certain
he was the first that brought that species of writing into reputation.
Archilochus is said to have written Fables one hundred years before
him;[6] but it would appear that those stories were not written for
posterity like those of Æsop. The Fables of Æsop were written in prose,
though the images that are in them afford good scope for a poet, of which
Phædrus has given an elegant specimen. Æsop writes with great simplicity,
elegance, and neatness; the schemes of his Fables are natural, the
sentiments just, and the conclusions moral. Quintilian recommends his
Fables as a first book for children;[7] and, when Plato had sent all the
poets into exile, he allows Æsop a residence in his commonwealth.[8] The
Athenians were good judges of literary merit, and erected a noble statue
for Æsop, to perpetuate his memory, which was sculped by the famous
Lysippus.

The great excellency of Æsop’s manner of writing is, that he blends the
pleasing and the instructive so well as to instruct and please at once.
Horace is much indebted to him for a plan of writing, and has formed a
rule from this famous Fabulist:  Omne tulit punctum, qui miscuit utile dulci;  Lectorem delectando, pariterque monendo.—_De Arte Poet._ ver. 343.

I wish I could conceal the exit of this great Fabulist and Moral Writer.
He was accused by the Delphians of sacrilege, and convicted by an act of
the greatest villany that ever was invented. They concealed among his
baggage, at his departure, some golden vessels consecrated to Apollo,
and then dispatched messengers to search his baggage. Upon this he was
accused of theft and sacrilege, condemned, and precipitated over a rock.
Thus ended the famous Æsop, whose Fables have immortalised his memory,
and will hand down his name to the latest posterity.




AN ESSAY UPON FABLE.


Fable is the method of conveying truth under the form of an Allegory. The
sense of a Fable is entirely different from the literal meaning of the
words that are used to compose it; and yet the real intention thereof is
visible and manifest, otherwise the Fable is not well composed. The sense
of a Fable of the moral kind ought always to be obvious at first view,
that the instruction intended to be given may have as early an effect as
possible.

The chief thing to be considered in a Fable is the _action_, which
conveys the moral or truth designed for instruction. There ought only to
be one action in a Fable, which must appear through the whole; otherwise
it will be liable to admit of different interpretations, and be the same
as a riddle, and have no effect. _Clearness, Unity, and Probability_,
are incidents essentially necessary in a moral Fable. If a Fable be not
so plain as to point out the sense of the writer clearly, but admit of
different interpretations, it does not answer the true design thereof.
If the incidents tend to convey different ideas, then the reader will
be at a loss to understand the chief intention of the author. All the
various incidents ought manifestly to unite in one design, and point
out one clear and perspicuous truth. Many of the modern Fables labour
under this defect; the incidents do not manifestly tend to point out the
moral. Fontaine’s Fable of the two pigeons, and Croxall’s story of the
coach-wheel, are of this sort.

The incidents of a Fable ought also to have _a real foundation in
nature_. This rule may be infringed by ascribing to creatures appetites
and passions that are not consistent with their known characters. “A Fox
should not be said to long for Grapes.”[9] The rule of Horace will hold
universally—  Sed non ut placidis cœant immitia: non ut  Serpentes avibus geminentur, tigribus agni.  Delphinum Sylvis appingit Fluctibus aprum.—HORACE, I. 13.  To join the wild with creatures that are tame,  Serpents with birds, or tygers with the lamb,  Paint whales in woods, and wild boars in the sea,  Ah, what a motley piece the whole would be!

Creatures different in their nature must not be associated in a just
Fable. The Lamb must not be made to travel with the Fox, nor the Wolf and
the Sheep to feed or associate together; for all this is unnatural, and
can never be rendered a _probable_ object of belief. The incidents in a
Fable ought also to be few, lest by crowding circumstances too close, the
whole appear confused, and perplex the mind.

The next thing to be considered in Fable is the _imagery_ or
_characters_; these may either be men, beasts, or inanimate beings.
All these have been introduced by the ancient Fabulists. In all
personifications the rules of analogy are to be observed; in those things
wherein man and other creatures have no similitude, no true image can be
formed in what respects human society. The persons and characters assumed
in Fables, ought therefore to have a likeness to the things to which they
are compared. All nature may serve to furnish a Fabulist with machinery.
Mountains, rivers, trees, animals, and even invisible powers may answer
his purpose; but, in the use of all sorts of machinery, a proper regard
must always be held to analogy. When language is attributed to animals,
they must not be made to speak in a style which bears no similitude to
some property in their nature; an owl must not be made to sing like a
nightingale; nor should a raven be made the symbol of an orator. When
beasts are made the representations of men, there ought always to be
something in their nature that bears a similitude to their character. The
same may be said of things inanimate; a strong man may be compared to a
mountain, but it would be preposterous to make the same comparison of a
dwarf. Vices and virtues ought in the same manner to be delineated in
Fable; a proud man may be compared to a high hill, a humble person to a
low valley. This is authorised by the writings of the Old Testament: _The
high mountains shall be brought low, and every valley shall be exalted._

When human actions are attributed to invisible powers, or especially to
the Deity, they ought to be such as are worthy of those ideas which are
generally received concerning him. In this, Homer is very faulty; for he
exalts his men almost to Gods, and brings down his Gods to the level of
beasts.

As for the style of Fable, simplicity is the greatest excellence; that
familiar manner of speech in which we converse is best suited for the
purposes of Fable. This manner of writing is more difficult to attain
than is generally imagined; it requires a particular taste, and is harder
to imitate than the sublime itself. The style of a Fable must always be
adapted to the characters which are introduced: for it would be absurd
to make the eagle speak in the same style with the bat; or the King of
the forest express himself in the language of the mouse. But in all these
particulars, nature will be the best guide; and where this is deficient,
no art can supply the want of it.


 

FABLES, _&c._
 

_FABLE I._

The Miller, his Son, and their Ass.    _’Tis better to pursue the dictates of one’s own reason, than    attempt to please all mankind._

A Miller and his Son were driving their Ass to market, in order to sell
him: and that he might get thither fresh and in good condition, they
drove him on gently before them. They had not proceeded far, when they
met a company of travellers. Sure, say they, you are mighty careful of
your Ass: methinks, one of you might as well get up and ride, as suffer
him to walk on at his ease, while you trudge after on foot. In compliance
with this advice, the Old Man set his Son upon the beast. And now, they
had scarce advanced a quarter of a mile farther, before they met another
company. You idle young rogue, said one of the party, why don’t you get
down and let your poor Father ride? Upon this, the Old Man made his Son
dismount, and got up himself. While they were marching in this manner,
a third company began to insult the Father. You hard-hearted unnatural
wretch, say they, how can you suffer that poor lad to wade through the
dirt, while you, like an alderman, ride at your ease? The good-natured
Miller stood corrected, and immediately took his Son up behind him. And
now the next man they met exclaimed, with more vehemence and indignation
than all the rest—Was there ever such a couple of lazy boobies! to
overload in so unconscionable a manner a poor dumb creature, who is far
less able to carry them than they are to carry him! The complying Old
Man would have been half inclined to make the trial, had not experience
by this time sufficiently convinced him, that there cannot be a more
fruitless attempt than to endeavour to please all mankind.
 

_FABLE II._

The Fox and the Bramble.    _We should bear with patience a small evil, when it is    connected with a greater good._

A Fox closely pursued by a pack of dogs took shelter under the covert of
a Bramble. He rejoiced in this asylum, and for a while was very happy:
but soon found, that if he attempted to stir, he was wounded by thorns
and prickles on every side. However, making a virtue of necessity, he
forbore to complain; and comforted himself with reflecting, that no
bliss is perfect; that good and evil are mixed, and flow from the same
fountain. These briars indeed, said he, will tear my skin a little, yet
they keep off the dogs. For the sake of the good, then, let me bear the
evil with patience: each bitter has its sweet, and these brambles, though
they wound my flesh, preserve my life from danger.
 

_FABLE III._

The Butterfly and the Rose.    _We exclaim loudly against that inconstancy in another to which    we give occasion by our own._

A fine powdered Butterfly fell in love with a beautiful Rose, who
expanded her charms in a neighbouring parterre. Matters were soon
adjusted between them, and they mutually vowed eternal fidelity. The
Butterfly, perfectly satisfied with the success of his amour, took a
tender leave of his mistress, and did not return again till noon. What!
said the Rose, when she saw him approaching, is the ardent passion you
vowed so soon extinguished? It is an age since you paid me a visit. But
no wonder: for I observed you courting by turns every flower in the
garden. You little coquet, replied the Butterfly, it well becomes _you_,
truly, to reproach me with my gallantries; when in fact I only copy
the example which you yourself have set me. For, not to mention the
satisfaction with which you admitted the kisses of the fragrant Zephyr,
did I not see you displaying your charms to the bee, the fly, the wasp,
and, in short, encouraging and receiving the addresses of every buzzing
insect that fluttered within your view? If you will be a coquet, you must
expect to find me inconstant.
 

_FABLE IV._

The Clock and the Dial.    _There is no absolute independency in the world; every one    depends in his station upon some above him, and that if this    order was taken away, there would be nothing except error and    confusion in the universe._

A Clock, which served for many years to repeat the hours and point out
time, happened to fall into conversation with a Dial, which also served,
when the sun shone, to tell what was the time of day. It happened to
be in a cloudy forenoon, when the sun did not shine. Says the Clock to
the Dial, What a mean slavery do you undergo! you cannot tell the hour
without the sun pleases to inform you; and now the half of the day is
past, and you know not what o’clock it is. I can tell the hour at any
time, and would not be in such a dependent state as you are in for the
world. Night and day are both alike to me. It is just now twelve o’clock.
Upon this the sun shone forth from under the cloud, and showed the exact
time of the day. It was half an hour past twelve. The Dial then replied
to the Clock, You may now perceive that boasting is not good; for you see
you are wrong. It is better to be under direction and follow truth, than
to be eye to one’s self and go wrong; your freedom is only a liberty to
err; and what you call slavery in my case, is the only method of being
freely in the right. You see that we should all of us keep our stations,
and depend upon one another. I depend upon the sun, and you depend upon
me; for if I did not serve to regulate your motions, you see you would
for ever go wrong. 

_FABLE V._

The Tortoise and the Two Crows.    _Curiosity often excites those people to hazardous    undertakings, whom vanity and indiscretion render totally unfit    for them._

Vanity and idle curiosity are qualities which generally prove destructive
to those who suffer themselves to be governed by them.

A Tortoise, weary of passing her days in the same obscure corner,
conceived a wonderful inclination to visit foreign countries. Two Crows,
whom the simple Tortoise acquainted with her intention, undertook to
oblige her upon the occasion. Accordingly, they told her, that if she
would fasten her mouth to the middle of a pole, they would take the two
ends, and transport her whithersoever she chose to be conveyed. The
Tortoise approved of the expedient; and everything being prepared, the
Crows began their flight with her. They had not travelled long in the
air, when they were met by a Magpie, who inquiring what they were bearing
along, they replied the queen of the Tortoises. The Tortoise, vain of
the new and unmerited appellation, was going to confirm the title, when,
opening her mouth for that purpose, she let go her hold, and was dashed
to pieces by her fall.
 

_FABLE VI._

The Country Maid and the Milk-Pail.    _When we dwell much on distant and chimerical advantages,    we neglect our present business, and are exposed to real    misfortunes._

When men suffer their imagination to amuse them with the prospect of
distant and uncertain improvements of their condition, they frequently
sustain real losses by their inattention to those affairs in which they
are immediately concerned.

A Country Maid was walking very deliberately with a pail of milk upon her
head, when she fell into the following train of reflections:—The money
for which I shall sell this milk, will enable me to increase my stock of
eggs to three hundred. These eggs, allowing for what may prove addle,
and what may be destroyed by vermin, will produce at least two hundred
and fifty chickens. The chickens will be fit to carry to market about
Christmas, when poultry always bear a good price, so that by May-day I
cannot fail of having money enough to purchase a gown. Green!—let me
consider—yes, green becomes my complexion best, and green it shall be.
In this dress I will go to the fair, where all the young fellows will
strive to have me for a partner; but I shall perhaps refuse every one of
them, and with an air of disdain toss from them. Transported with this
triumphant thought, she could not forbear acting with her head what thus
passed in her imagination, when down came the pail of milk, and with it
all her imaginary happiness. 

_FABLE VII._

The Spider and the Silkworm.    _He that is employed in works of use generally advantages    himself or others; while he who toils alone for fame must often    expect to lose his labour._

How vainly we promise ourselves that our flimsy productions will be
rewarded with immortal honour! A Spider, busied in spreading his web from
one side of a room to the other, was asked by an industrious Silkworm,
to what end he spent so much time and labour, in making such a number of
lines and circles? The Spider angrily replied, Do not disturb me, thou
ignorant thing: I transmit my ingenuity to posterity, and fame is the
object of my wishes. Just as he had spoken, a chambermaid, coming into
the room to feed her Silkworms, saw the Spider at his work, and with one
stroke of her broom, swept him away, and destroyed at once his labours
and his hope of fame.
 

_FABLE VIII._

The Bee and the Fly.    _The greatest genius with a vindictive temper is far surpast in    point of happiness by men of talents less considerable._

A Bee, observing a Fly frisking about her hive, asked him, in a very
passionate tone, what he did there? Is it for such scoundrels as you,
said she, to intrude into the company of the queens of the air? You
have great reason, truly, replied the Fly, to be out of humour. I am
sure they must be mad who would have any concern with so quarrelsome a
nation. And why so? thou saucy malapert, returned the enraged Bee; we
have the best laws, and are governed by the best policy in the world.
We feed upon the most fragrant flowers, and all our business is to make
honey: honey which equals nectar, thou tasteless wretch, who livest upon
nothing but putrefaction and excrement. We live as we can, rejoined the
Fly. Poverty, I hope, is no crime; but passion is one, I am sure. The
honey you make is sweet, I grant you; but your heart is all bitterness:
for to be revenged on an enemy, you will destroy your own life; and are
so inconsiderate in your rage, as to do more mischief to yourselves
than to your adversary. Take my word for it, one had better have less
considerable talents, and use them with more discretion.
 

_FABLE IX._

The Huron and the Frenchman.    _Custom has a mighty effect upon mankind, and more differences    arise in character from custom than from natural causes.    Perhaps all men are in the state they should be in; they should    therefore live contented._

An airy Frenchman happened to meet a Huron upon the Mississippi, as he
went with his bow and shafts to seek provision for his family. Says
Monsieur to the savage, You have a very toilsome life of it, who, when
other people sit by the fireside, enjoying the benefit of good food
and good company, are obliged to traverse the woods in the midst of
snow and storms to preserve a wretched existence. How come you by your
food? replies the Huron. Does it rain from the clouds to you? No, says
the Frenchman; we work in summer, and make provision for winter, and,
during the cold months, sit by the fire and enjoy ourselves. For the
same reason, says the Huron, do we lay up provisions in winter, that we
may rest in summer when the days are hot. Your enjoyments are confined
within the walls of a house, and by the side of a fire, but ours are more
extensive; we assemble upon the mountains and in the woods in summer for
pleasure, and our delights are to observe the works of nature; the sun
serves us instead of fire to warm us, and we are never at a loss for
houses while the woods remain. This is the season when we lay up our
store, and it serves us in summer till winter return. We are accustomed
to endure the cold, and our exercise keeps us from feeling it to excess.
At night the skins of wild beasts keep us from the cold till the morning
dawn, and then we pursue the same employments. Were we not to live in
this manner, the wild beasts would so increase, that they would become
our masters; but our necessity of having food and clothing prevents them
from increasing to very great numbers. What you account pleasure, would
be none to us; and your manner of life appears as ridiculous to the
Hurons, as ours appears to you. You reckon us idolaters, because we pay
adoration to the rising sun; but you misunderstand us; we consider that
light to be a symbol of the great Author of Nature, and only worship him
through this luminary. We do not understand your manner of worship, which
to us appears abundantly absurd; for the Deity is no more like images
of gold and silver, than he is like the sun. The sun is a more glorious
effect of his power and goodness; for he serves many excellent purposes,
and we could not live without him; but your symbols appear to have no
use. The Frenchman could make no reply, and the Huron proceeded on his
hunting.
 

_FABLE X._

Genius, Virtue, and Reputation.    _There are few things so irreparably lost as Reputation._

Genius, Virtue, and Reputation, three intimate friends, agreed to travel
over the island of Great Britain, to see whatever might be worthy of
observation. But as some misfortune, said they, may happen to separate
us, let us consider before we set out by what means we may find each
other again. Should it be my ill fate, said Genius, to be severed from
you, my associates—which Heaven forbid!—you may find me kneeling in
devotion before the tomb of Shakespear, or rapt in some grove where
Milton talked with angels, or musing in the grotto where Pope caught
inspiration. Virtue, with a sigh, acknowledged that her friends were
not very numerous: but were I to lose you, she cried, with whom I am at
present so happily united, I should choose to take sanctuary in the
temples of religion, in the places of royalty, or in the stately domes of
ministers of state; but as it may be my ill-fortune to be there denied
admittance, inquire for some cottage where contentment has a bower,
and there you will certainly find me. Ah! my dear companions, said
Reputation, very earnestly, you, I perceive, when missing, may possibly
be recovered; but take care, I entreat you, always to keep sight of me,
for if I am once lost, I am never to be retrieved.
 

_FABLE XI._

Industry and Sloth.    _Our term of life does not allow time for long protracted    deliberations._

How many live in the world as useless as if they had never been born!
They pass through life like a bird through the air, and leave no track
behind them; waste the prime of their days in deliberating what they
shall do, and bring them to a period without coming to any determination.

An indolent young man, being asked why he lay in bed so long, jocosely
and carelessly answered, Every morning of my life I am hearing causes.
I have two fine girls, their names are Industry and Sloth, close at my
bed-side as soon as ever I awake, pressing their different suits. One
intreats me to get up, the other persuades me to lie still; and then they
alternately give me various reasons why I should rise, and why I should
not. This detains me so long, as it is the duty of an impartial judge to
hear all that can be said on either side, that before the pleadings are
over, it is time to go to dinner. 

_FABLE XII._

The Hermit and the Bear.    _The random zeal of inconsiderate friends is often as hurtful    as the wrath of enemies._

An imprudent friend often does as much mischief by his too great zeal as
the worst enemy could effect by his malice.

A certain Hermit having done a good office to a Bear, the grateful
creature was so sensible of his obligation, that he begged to be admitted
as the guardian and companion of his solitude. The Hermit willingly
accepted his offer, and conducted him to his cell, where they passed
their time together in an amicable manner. One very hot day, the Hermit
having laid him down to sleep, the officious Bear employed himself in
driving away the flies from his patron’s face. But in spite of all his
care, one of the flies perpetually returned to the attack, and at last
settled upon the Hermit’s nose. Now I shall have you most certainly,
said the Bear; and with the best intentions imaginable, gave him a
violent blow on the face, which very effectually indeed demolished
the Fly, but at the same time most terribly bruised the face of his
benefactor.
 

_FABLE XIII._

The Passenger and the Pilot.    _We are nowhere out of the reach of Providence, either to    punish or to protect us._

It had blown a violent storm at sea, and the whole crew of a large vessel
were in imminent danger of shipwreck. After the rolling of the waves were
somewhat abated, a certain Passenger, who had never been at sea before,
observing the Pilot to have appeared wholly unconcerned, even in their
greatest danger, had the curiosity to ask him what death his father died.
What death? said the Pilot; why he perished at Sea, as my grandfather
did before him. And are you not afraid of trusting yourself to an element
that has thus proved fatal to your family? Afraid!—by no means. Why we
must all die: is not your father dead? Yes, but he died in his bed. And
why then are you not afraid of trusting yourself to your bed? Because I
am there perfectly secure. It may be so, replied the Pilot; but if the
hand of Providence is equally extended over all places, there is no more
reason for me to be afraid of going to sea than for you to be afraid of
going to bed.
 

_FABLE XIV._

The Partial Judge.    _The injuries we do, and those we suffer, are seldom weighed in    the same scales._

A Farmer came to a neighbouring Lawyer expressing great concern for an
accident which he said had just happened. One of your oxen, continued
he, has been gored by an unlucky bull of mine, and I shall be glad to
know how I am to make you a reparation. Thou art a very honest fellow,
replied the Lawyer, and wilt not think it unreasonable that I expect one
of thy oxen in return. It is no more than justice, quoth the Farmer, to
be sure; but what did I say?—I mistake: it is your bull that has killed
one of my oxen. Indeed! says the Lawyer; that alters the case: I must
inquire into the affair; and if—— And _if!_ said the Farmer; the business
I find would have been concluded without an _if_, had you been as ready
to do justice to others as to exact it from them. 

_FABLE XV._

The Lion and the Gnat.    _Little minds are so much elevated by any advantage gained over    their superiors, that they are often thrown off their guard    against a sudden change of fortune._

Avaunt! thou paltry contemptible insect! said a proud Lion one day to a
Gnat that was frisking about in the air near his den. The Gnat, enraged
at this unprovoked insult, vowed revenge, and immediately darted into
the Lion’s ear. After having sufficiently teased him in that quarter,
she quitted her station and retired under his belly, and from thence
made her last and most formidable attack in his nostrils, where stinging
him almost to madness, the Lion at length fell down, utterly spent with
rage, vexation, and pain. The Gnat having thus abundantly gratified her
resentment, flew off in great exultation; but in the heedless transports
of her success, not sufficiently attending to her own security, she
found herself unexpectedly entangled in the web of a spider; who, rushing
out instantly upon her, put an end to her triumph and her life.

This fable instructs us, never to suffer success so far to transport us
as to throw us off our guard against a reverse of fortune.
 

_FABLE XVI._

The Dog and the Crocodile.    _It is ever dangerous to be long conversant with persons of a    bad character._

We can never be too carefully guarded against a connection with persons
of an ill character.

As a dog was coursing on the banks of the Nile, he grew thirsty; but
fearing to be seized by the monsters of that river, he would not stop to
satiate his draught, but lapped as he ran. A Crocodile, raising his head
above the surface of the water, asked him, why he was in such a hurry.
He had often, he said, wished for his acquaintance, and should be glad
to embrace the present opportunity. You do me great honour, returned the
Dog, but it is to avoid such companions as you that I am in so much haste.
 

_FABLE XVII._

The Wolf in Disguise.    _There would be little chance of detecting hypocrisy, were it    not always addicted to over-act its part._

Designing hypocrites frequently lay themselves open to discovery by
over-acting their parts.

A Wolf, who by frequent visits to a flock of sheep in his neighbourhood,
began to be extremely well known to them, thought it expedient, for the
more successfully carrying on his depredations, to appear in a new
character. To this end he disguised himself in a shepherd’s habit; and
resting his fore-feet upon a stick, which served him by way of crook,
he softly made his approaches towards the fold. It happened that the
shepherd and his dog were both of them extended on the grass fast asleep;
so that he would certainly have succeeded in his project, if he had not
imprudently attempted to imitate the shepherd’s voice. The horrid noise
awakened them both: when the Wolf, encumbered with his disguise, and
finding it impossible either to resist or to flee, yielded up his life an
easy prey to the shepherd’s dog.
 

 

The Ass and his Master.    _Avarice often misses its point, through the means it uses to    secure it._

A diligent Ass, daily loaded beyond his strength by a severe Master, whom
he had long served, and who kept him at very short commons, happened
one day in his old age to be oppressed with a more than ordinary burthen
of earthenware. His strength being much impaired, and the road deep and
uneven, he unfortunately made a trip, and, unable to recover himself,
fell down and broke all the vessels to pieces. His Master, transported
with rage, began to beat him most unmercifully. Against whom the
poor Ass, lifting up his head as he lay on the ground, thus strongly
remonstrated: Unfeeling wretch! to thy own avaricious cruelty, in first
pinching me of food, and then loading me beyond my strength, thou owest
the misfortune which thou so unjustly imputest to me.  

The Eagle and the Crow.    _A false estimate of our own abilities ever exposes us to    ridicule, and sometimes to danger._

To mistake our own talents, or over-rate our abilities, is always
ridiculous, and sometimes dangerous.

An Eagle, from the top of a high mountain, making a stoop at a lamb,
pounced upon it, and bore it away to her young. A Crow, who had built
her nest in a cedar near the foot of the rock, observing what passed,
was ambitious of performing the same exploit; and darting from her nest,
fixed her talons in the fleece of another lamb. But neither able to move
her prey, nor to disentangle her feet, she was taken by the shepherd,
and carried away for his children to play with; who eagerly enquiring
what bird it was:—An hour ago, said he, she fancied herself an eagle,
however, I suppose she is by this time convinced that she is but a crow. 
The Lion, the Tyger, and the Fox.    _The intemperate rage of clients gives the lawyer an    opportunity of seizing the property in dispute._

A Lion and a Tyger jointly seized on a young fawn, which they immediately
killed. This they had no sooner performed than they fell a fighting, in
order to decide whose property it should be. The battle was so bloody and
so obstinate that they were both compelled, through weariness and loss of
blood, to desist; and lay down by mutual consent, totally disabled. At
this instant, a Fox unluckily came by; who, perceiving their situation,
made bold to seize the contested prey, and bore it off unmolested. As
soon as the Lion could recover his breath,—How foolish, said he, has been
our conduct! Instead of being contented, as we ought, with our respective
shares, our senseless rage has rendered us unable to prevent this
rascally Fox from defrauding us of the whole. The Lion and the Ass.    _A total neglect is the best return the generous can make to    the scurrility of the base._

A conceited Ass had once the impertinence to bray forth some contemptuous
speeches against the Lion. The suddenness of the insult at first
raised some emotions of wrath in his breast; but turning his head, and
perceiving from whence it came, they immediately subsided, and he very
sedately walked on, without deigning to honour the contemptible creature
even so much as with an angry word.
 

_FABLE XXII._

The Trumpeter.    _The fomenter of mischief is at least as culpable as he who    puts it in execution._

A Trumpeter in a certain army happened to be taken prisoner. He was
ordered immediately to execution; but pleaded, in excuse for himself,
that it was unjust a person should suffer death, who, far from an
intention of mischief, did not even wear an offensive weapon. So much
the rather, replied one of the enemy, shalt thou die; since without any
design of fighting thyself, thou excitest others to the bloody business:
for he that is the abetter of a bad action, is at least equally guilty
with him that commits it.
 

_FABLE XXIII._

The Bear and the Bees.    _It were more prudent to acquiesce under an injury from a    single person, than by an act of vengeance to bring upon us the    resentment of a whole community._

A Bear happened to be stung by a Bee, and the pain was so acute, that in
the madness of revenge he ran into the garden and overturned the hive.
This outrage provoked their anger to a high degree, and brought the
fury of the whole swarm upon him. They attacked him with such violence,
that his life was in danger, and it was with the utmost difficulty
that he made his escape, wounded from head to tail. In this desperate
condition, lamenting his misfortunes, and licking his sores, he could not
forbear reflecting how much more advisable it had been to have patiently
acquiesced under one injury, than thus by an unprofitable resentment to
have provoked a thousand.
 

_FABLE XXIV._

The Oak and the Willow.    _The courage of meeting death in an honourable cause is more    commendable, than any address or artifice we can make use of to    evade it._

A conceited Willow had once the vanity to challenge his mighty neighbour
the Oak to a trial of strength. It was to be determined by the next
storm; and Æolus was addressed by both parties to exert his most powerful
efforts. This was no sooner asked than granted; and a violent hurricane
arose, when the pliant Willow, bending from the blast, or shrinking under
her, evaded all its force, while the generous Oak, disdaining to give
way, opposed its fury, and was torn up by the roots. Immediately the
Willow began to exult, and to claim the victory, when thus the fallen
Oak interrupted his exultation: Callest thou this a trial of strength?
Poor wretch! not to thy strength, but weakness; not to thy boldly facing
danger, but meanly skulking from it, thou owest thy present safety. I
am an Oak, though fallen; thou still a Willow, though unhurt: but who,
except so mean a wretch as thyself, would prefer an ignominious life,
preserved by craft or cowardice, to the glory of meeting death in an
honourable cause?
 

_FABLE XXV._

The Bear and the Two Friends.    _Cowards are incapable of true Friendship._

Two Friends, setting out together upon a journey which led through a
dangerous forest, mutually promised to assist each other if they should
happen to be assaulted. They had not proceeded far before they perceived
a Bear making towards them with great rage. There were no hopes in
flight; but one of them, being very active, sprung up into a tree; upon
which the other, throwing himself flat on the ground, held his breath,
and pretended to be dead, remembering to have heard it asserted that this
creature will not prey upon a dead carcase. The Bear came up, and after
smelling to him for some time, left him, and went on. When he was fairly
out of sight and hearing, the hero from the tree calls out—Well, my
friend, what said the Bear? He seemed to whisper you very closely. He did
so, replied the other, and gave me this good piece of advice: Never to
associate with a wretch who in the hour of danger will desert his friend. 

_FABLE XXVI._

The Wasps and the Bees.    _It is a folly to arrogate works to ourselves of which we are    by no means capable._

Pretenders of every kind are best detected by appealing to their works.

Some honeycombs being claimed by a swarm of Wasps, the right owners
protested against their demand, and the cause was referred to a Hornet.
Witnesses being examined, they deposed that certain winged creatures,
who had a loud hum, were of a yellowish colour, and somewhat like bees,
were observed a considerable time hovering about the place where this
nest was found. But this did not sufficiently decide the question; for
these characteristics, the Hornet observed, agreed no less with the Bees
than with the Wasps. At length a sensible old Bee offered to put the
matter upon this decisive issue: Let a place be appointed by the court,
said he, for the plaintiffs and defendants to work in. It will then
soon appear which of us are capable of forming such regular cells, and
afterwards of filling them with so delicious a fluid. The Wasps refusing
to agree to this proposal, sufficiently convinced the judge on which side
the right lay, and he decreed the honeycombs accordingly.
 

_FABLE XXVII._

Fortune and the School-boy.    _We are always ready to censure Fortune for the ill effects of    our own carelessness._

A School-boy, fatigued with play, threw himself down by the brink of
a deep pit, where he fell fast asleep. Fortune happening to pass by,
saw him in this dangerous situation, and kindly gave him a pat on the
shoulder: My dear child, said she, if you had fallen into this pit, I
should have borne the blame; though in fact the accident would have been
wholly owing to your own carelessness.

Misfortune, said a celebrated Cardinal, is but another word for
imprudence. The maxim is by no means absolutely true: certain, however,
it is, that mankind suffer more evils from their own imprudence, than
from events which it is not in their power to controul.
 

_FABLE XXVIII._

The Belly and the Limbs.    _It is a folly even to wish to withhold our part from the    support of civil government._

Menenius Agrippa, a Roman Consul, being deputed by the senate to appease
a dangerous tumult and sedition of the people, who refused to pay the
taxes necessary for carrying on the business of the state, convinced them
of their folly by delivering to them the following fable:—

My friends and countrymen, said he, attend to my words. It once happened
that the Members of the human body, taking some exception at the conduct
of the Belly, resolved no longer to grant him the usual supplies. The
Tongue first, in a seditious speech, aggravated their grievances; and
after highly extolling the activity and diligence of the Hands and
Feet, set forth how hard and unreasonable it was that the fruits of
their labour should be squandered away upon the insatiable cravings of
a fat and indolent Paunch, which was entirely useless, and unable to do
anything towards helping himself. This speech was received with unanimous
applause by all the Members. Immediately the Hands declared they would
work no more; the Feet determined to carry no further the load of guts
with which they had hitherto been oppressed; nay, the very Teeth refused
to prepare a single morsel more for his use. In this distress, the Belly
bethought them to consider maturely, and not foment so senseless a
rebellion. There is none of you, says he, can be ignorant that whatsoever
you bestow upon me is immediately converted to your use, and dispersed
by me for the good of you all into every Limb. But he remonstrated in
vain; for during the clamours of passion, the voice of reason is always
disregarded. It being therefore impossible for him to quiet the tumult,
he starved for want of their assistance, and the body wasted away to a
skeleton. The Limbs, grown weak and languid, were sensible at last of
their error, and would fain have returned to their respective duties; but
it was now too late, death had taken possession of the whole, and they
all perished together.
 

_FABLE XXIX._

The Wolf and the Lamb.    _They who do not feel the sentiments of humanity will seldom    listen to the pleas of reason._

When cruelty and injustice are armed with power, and determined on
oppression, the strongest pleas of innocence are preferred in vain.

A Wolf and a Lamb were accidentally quenching their thirst together at
the same rivulet. The Wolf stood towards the head of the stream, and the
Lamb at some distance below. The injurious beast, resolved on a quarrel,
fiercely demands—How dare you disturb the water which I am drinking? The
poor Lamb, all trembling, replies, How, I beseech you, can that possibly
be the case, since the current sets from you to me? Disconcerted by the
force of truth, he changes the accusation. Six months ago, says he, you
vilely slandered me. Impossible, returns the Lamb, for I was not then
born. No matter, it was your father, then, or some of your relations; and
immediately seizing the innocent Lamb, he tore him to pieces.
 

_FABLE XXX._

The Daw with Borrowed Feathers.    _To aim at figure by the means either of borrowed wit, or    borrowed money, generally subjects us at least to tenfold    ridicule._

When a pert young Templar or city apprentice sets up for a fine
gentleman, with the assistance of an embroidered waistcoat and Dresden
ruffles, but without one qualification proper to the character, how
frequently does it happen that he is laughed at by his equals, and
despised by those whom he presumed to imitate!

A pragmatic Jackdaw was vain enough to imagine that he wanted nothing
but the coloured plumes to render him as elegant a bird as the Peacock.
Puffed up with this wise conceit, he dressed himself with a sufficient
quantity of their most beautiful feathers, and in this borrowed garb,
forsaking his old companions, endeavoured to pass for a Peacock; but
he no sooner attempted to associate with these genteel creatures, than
an affected strut betrayed the vain pretender. The offended Peacocks,
plucking from him their degraded feathers, soon stripped him of his
finery, reduced him to a mere Jackdaw, and drove him back to his
brethren, by whom he was now equally despised, and justly punished with
derision and contempt. 

_FABLE XXXI._

The Wolf and the Shepherds.    _We severely censure that in others, which we ourselves    practise without scruple._

How apt are men to condemn in others what they practise themselves
without scruple!

A Wolf, says Plutarch, peeping into a hut where a company of Shepherds
were regaling themselves with a joint of mutton; Lord, said he, what a
clamour would these men have raised if they had catched _me_ at such a
banquet!
 

_FABLE XXXII._

The Eagle and the Owl.    _The partiality of parents often makes themselves ridiculous,    and their children unhappy._

An Eagle and an Owl having entered into a league of mutual amity, one of
the articles of their treaty was, that the former should not prey upon
the younglings of the latter. But tell me, said the Owl, should you know
my little ones if you were to see them? Indeed I should not, replied
the Eagle; but if you describe them to me, it will be sufficient. You
are to observe, then, returned the Owl, in the first place, that the
charming creatures are perfectly well shaped; in the next, that there
is a remarkable sweetness and vivacity in their countenances; and then
there is something in their voices so peculiarly melodious. It is enough,
interrupted the Eagle; by these marks I cannot fail of distinguishing
them; and you may depend upon their never receiving any injury from
me. It happened, not long afterwards, as the Eagle was upon the wing in
quest of his prey, that he discovered amidst the ruins of an old castle
a nest of grim-faced ugly birds, with gloomy countenances, and a voice
like that of the Furies. These, undoubtedly, said he, cannot be the
offspring of my friend, and so I shall venture to make free with them. He
had scarce finished his repast and departed, when the Owl returned; who,
finding nothing of her brood remaining but some fragments of the mangled
carcases, broke out into the most bitter exclamations against the cruel
and perfidious author of her calamity. A neighbouring Bat, who overheard
her lamentations, and had been witness to what had passed between her and
the Eagle, very gravely told her that she had nobody to blame for this
misfortune but herself, whose blind prejudices in favour of her children
had prompted her to give such a description of them as did not resemble
them in any one single feature or quality.

Parents should very carefully guard against that weak partiality
towards their children which renders them blind to their failings and
imperfections, as no disposition is more likely to prove prejudicial to
their future welfare.
 

_FABLE XXXIII._

The Sick Lion, the Fox, and the Wolf.    _Men who meditate mischief, suggest the same to others; and    generally pay dear for their froward gratifications._

A Lion, having surfeited himself with feasting too luxuriously on the
carcase of a wild boar, was seized with a violent and dangerous disorder.
The beasts of the forest flocked in great numbers to pay their respects
to him upon the occasion, and scarce one was absent except the Fox. The
Wolf, an ill-natured and malicious beast, seized this opportunity to
accuse the Fox of pride, ingratitude, and disaffection to his majesty.
In the midst of his invective, the Fox entered; who having heard part of
the Wolf’s accusation, and observing the Lion’s countenance to be kindled
into wrath, thus adroitly excused himself, and retorted upon his accuser:
I see many here who with mere lip service have pretended to shew you
their loyalty; but for my part, from the moment I heard of your majesty’s
illness, neglecting useless compliments, I employed myself day and night
to enquire among the most learned physicians an infallible remedy for
your disease, and have at length happily been informed of one. It is a
plaister made of part of a Wolf’s skin, taken warm from his back, and
laid to your majesty’s stomach. This remedy was no sooner proposed than
it was determined that the experiment should be tried; and whilst the
operation was performing, the Fox, with a sarcastic smile, whispered this
useful maxim in the Wolf’s ear—If you would be safe from harm yourself,
learn for the future not to meditate mischief against others. 

_FABLE XXXIV._

The Blind Man and the Lame.    _The wants and weaknesses of individuals form the connections    of society._

A Blind man, being stopped in a bad piece of road, meets with a Lame man,
and intreats him to guide him through the difficulty he was got into.
How can I do that, replied the Lame man, since I am scarce able to drag
myself along? But as you appear to be very strong, if you will carry
me, we will seek our fortunes together. It will then be my interest to
warn you of anything that may obstruct your way; your feet shall be my
feet, and my eyes yours. With all my heart, returned the Blind Man; let
us render each other our mutual services. So taking his lame companion
on his back, they by means of their union travelled on with safety and
pleasure.
 

_FABLE XXXV._

The Lion, the Bear, the Monkey, and the Fox.    _It is often more prudent to suppress our sentiments than    either to flatter or to rail._

The Tyrant of the forest issued a proclamation, commanding all his
subjects to repair immediately to his royal den. Among the rest the Bear
made his appearance; but pretending to be offended with the steams which
issued from the monarch’s apartments, he was imprudent enough to hold his
nose in his majesty’s presence. This insolence was so highly resented,
that the Lion in a rage laid him dead at his feet. The Monkey, observing
what had passed, trembled for his carcase; and attempted to conciliate
favour by the most abject flattery. He began with protesting, that for
his part he thought the apartments were perfumed with Arabian spices; and
exclaiming against the rudeness of the Bear, admired the beauty of his
majesty’s paws, so happily formed, he said, to correct the insolence of
clowns. This fulsome adulation, instead of being received as he expected,
proved no less offensive than the rudeness of the Bear; and the courtly
Monkey was in like manner extended by the side of Sir Bruin. And now his
majesty cast his eye upon the Fox. Well, Reynard, said he, and what scent
do you discover here? Great prince, replied the cautious Fox, my nose was
never esteemed my most distinguishing sense; and at present I would by no
means venture to give my opinion, as I have unfortunately got a terrible
cold.
 

_FABLE XXXVI._

The Two Horses.    _The object of our pride is often the cause of our misfortunes._

Two Horses were travelling the road together; one loaded with a sack of
flour, the other with a sum of money. The latter, proud of his splendid
burthen, tossed up his head with an air of conscious superiority, and
every now and then cast a look of contempt upon his humble companion.
In passing through a wood, they were met by a gang of highwaymen, who
immediately seized upon the horse that was carrying the treasure; but the
spirited steed not being altogether disposed to stand so quietly as was
necessary for their purpose, they beat him most unmercifully, and after
plundering him of his boasted load, left him to lament at his leisure the
cruel bruises he had received. Friend, said his despised companion to
him (who had now reason to triumph in his turn), distinguished posts are
often dangerous to those who possess them: if you had served a miller, as
I do, you might have travelled the road unmolested. 

_FABLE XXXVII._

The Mock-bird.    _Ridicule appears with a very ill grace in persons who possess    no one talent beside._

There is a certain bird in the West Indies, which has the faculty of
mimicking the notes of every other songster, without being able himself
to add any original strains to the concert. As one of these Mock-birds
was displaying his talent of ridicule among the branches of a venerable
wood: ’Tis very well, said a little warbler, speaking in the name of all
the rest; we grant you that our music is not without its faults: but why
will you not favour us with a strain of your own?
 

_FABLE XXXVIII._

The Ant and the Caterpillar.    _Boys of no very promising appearance often become the greatest    men._

As a Caterpillar was advancing very slowly along one of the alleys
of a beautiful garden, he was met by a pert lively Ant, who tossing
up her head with a scornful air, cried, Prithee get out of the way,
thou poor creeping animal, and do not presume to obstruct the paths of
thy superiors, by wriggling along the road, and besmearing the walks
appropriated to their footsteps. Poor creature! thou lookest like a thing
half-made, which Nature not liking threw by unfinished. I could almost
pity thee, methinks; but it is beneath one of my quality to talk to such
mean creatures as thou art: and so, poor crawling wretch, adieu.

The humble Caterpillar, struck dumb with this disdainful language,
retired, went to work, wound himself up in a silken cell, and at the
appointed time came out a beautiful Butterfly. Just as he was sallying
forth, he observed the scornful Ant passing by. Proud insect, said he,
stop a moment, and learn from the circumstances in which you now see
me, never to despise any one for that condition in which Providence has
thought fit to place him; as there is none so mean but may one day,
either in this state or in a better, be exalted above those who looked
down upon him with unmerited contempt.
 

_FABLE XXXIX._

The Two Lizards.    _The superior safety of an obscure and humble station, is a    balance for the honours of high and envied life._

As two Lizards were basking under a south wall, How contemptible, said
one of them, is our condition! We exist, ’tis true, but that is all: for
we hold no sort of rank in the creation, and are utterly unnoticed by
the world. Cursed obscurity! Why was I not rather born a stag, to range
at large, the pride and glory of some royal forest? It happened, that in
the midst of these unjust murmurs, a pack of hounds was heard in full cry
after the very creature he was envying, who, being quite spent with the
chase, was torn in pieces by the dogs in sight of our two Lizards. And is
this the lordly stag, whose place in the creation you wish to hold? said
the wiser Lizard to his complaining friend: Let his sad fate teach you to
bless Providence for placing you in that humble situation, which secures
you from the dangers of a more elevated rank.
 

_FABLE XL._

Jupiter’s Lottery.    _Folly, passing with men for wisdom, makes each contented with    his own share of understanding._

Jupiter, in order to please mankind, directed Mercury to give notice
that he had established a Lottery, in which there were no blanks; and
that amongst a variety of other valuable chances, Wisdom was the highest
prize. It was Jupiter’s command, that in this Lottery some of the gods
should also become adventurers. The tickets being disposed of, and
the wheels placed, Mercury was employed to preside at the drawing. It
happened that the best prize fell to Minerva: upon which a general murmur
ran through the assembly, and hints were thrown out that Jupiter had
used some unfair practices to secure this desirable lot to his daughter.
Jupiter, that he might at once both punish and silence these impious
clamours of the human race, presented them with Folly in the place of
Wisdom; with which they went away perfectly well contented. And from that
time the greatest Fools have always looked upon themselves as the wisest
men. 

_FABLE XLI._

The Snipe Shooter.    _We often miss our point by dividing our attention._

As a sportsman ranged the fields with his gun, attended by an experienced
old Spaniel, he happened to spring a Snipe; and almost at the same
instant, a covey of Partridges. Surprised at the accident, and divided in
his aim, he let fly too indeterminately, and by this means missed them
_both_. Ah, my good master, said the Spaniel, you should never have two
aims at once. Had you not been dazzled and seduced by the luxurious hope
of Partridge, you would most probably have secured your Snipe.
 

_FABLE XLII._

The Two Dogs.    _Our own moderation will not secure us from disturbance, if    we connect ourselves with men of turbulent and litigious    dispositions._

Hasty and inconsiderate connections are generally attended with great
disadvantages: and much of every man’s good or ill fortune depends upon
the choice he makes of his friends.

A good-natured Spaniel overtook a surly Mastiff, as he was travelling
upon the high road. Tray, although an entire stranger to Tyger, very
civilly accosted him: And if it would be no interruption, he said, he
should be glad to bear him company on his way. Tyger, who happened not to
be altogether in so growling a mood as usual, accepted the proposal; and
they very amicably pursued their journey together. In the midst of their
conversation they arrived at the next village, where Tyger began to
display his malignant disposition, by an unprovoked attack upon every dog
he met. The villagers immediately sallied forth with great indignation
to rescue their respective favourites; and falling upon our two friends
without distinction or mercy, poor Tray was most cruelly treated, for no
other reason but his being found in bad company.
 

_FABLE XLIII._

The Trouts and the Gudgeon.    _A person can hardly be deemed too cautious, where the first    mistake is irretrievable, or fatal._

A fisherman in the month of May stood angling on the banks of the
Thames with an artificial fly. He threw his bait with so much art, that
a young Trout was rushing towards it, when she was prevented by her
mother. Never, said she, my child, be too precipitate, where there is
a possibility of danger. Take due time to consider, before you risk
an action that _may_ be fatal. How know you whether yon appearance be
_indeed_ a fly, or the snare of an enemy? Let some one else make the
experiment _before_ you. If it be a fly, he very probably will elude
the first attack: and the second may be made, if not with success,
at least with safety.—She had no sooner uttered this caution, than a
Gudgeon seized upon the pretended fly, and became an example to the giddy
daughter of the great importance of her mother’s counsel.
 

_FABLE XLIV._

The Sun and the Wind.    _Gentle means, on many occasions, are more effectual than    violent ones._

Phœbus and Æolus had once a dispute which of them could soonest prevail
with a certain traveller to part with his cloak. Æolus began the attack,
and assaulted him with great violence. But the man, wrapping his cloak
still closer about him, doubled his efforts to keep it, and went on his
way. And now, Phœbus darted his warm insinuating rays, which melting the
traveller by degrees, at length obliged him to throw aside that cloak
which all the rage of Æolus could not compel him to resign. Learn hence,
said Phœbus to the blustering god, that soft and gentle means will often
accomplish what force and fury can never effect.
 

_FABLE XLV._

The Boy and the Nettle.    _There are certain persons who require to be treated rather    with spirit and resolution, than either tenderness or delicacy._

A little Boy playing in the fields, chanced to be stung by a Nettle, and
came crying to his father: he told him, he had been hurt by that nasty
weed several times before; that he was always afraid of it; and that now
he did but just touch it, as lightly as possible, when he was so severely
stung. Child, says he, your touching it so gently and timorously is the
very _reason_ of its hurting you. A Nettle may be handled safely, if you
do it with courage and resolution; if you seize it boldly and gripe it
fast, be assured it will never sting you: and you will meet with many
sorts of persons, as well as things in the world, which ought to be
treated in the very same manner.
 

_FABLE XLVI._

The Beggar and his Dog.    _’Tis misery to depend upon patrons, whose circumstances make    their charity necessary at home._

A Beggar and his Dog sat at the gate of a noble Courtier, and was
preparing to make a meal on a bowl of fragments from the Kitchen-maid.
A poor Dependant of his Lordship’s, who had been sharing the singular
favour of a dinner at the Steward’s table, was struck with the
appearance, and stopped a little to observe them. The Beggar, hungry and
voracious as any Courtier in Christendom, seized with greediness the
choicest morsels, and swallowed them himself; the residue was divided
into portions for his children. A scrag was thrust into one pocket for
honest Jack, a crust into another for bashful Tom, and a luncheon of
cheese was wrapt up with care for the little favourite of his hopeful
family. In short, if anything was thrown to the Dog, it was a bone so
closely picked, that it scarce afforded a pittance to keep life and soul
together. How exactly alike, said the Dependant, is this poor Dog’s case
and mine! He is watching for a dinner from a master who cannot spare it;
I for a place from a needy Lord, whose wants perhaps are greater than my
own, and whose relations more clamorous than any of this Beggar’s brats.
Shrewdly was it said by an ingenious writer, a _Courtier’s Dependant_ is
a _Beggar’s Dog_. 

_FABLE XLVII._

The Fox and the Stork.    _We should always reflect, before we rally another, whether we    can bear to have the jest retorted._

The Fox, though in general more inclined to roguery than wit, had once
a strong inclination to play the wag with his neighbour the Stork. He
accordingly invited her to dinner in great form; but when it came upon
the table the Stork found it consisted entirely of different soups,
served up in broad shallow dishes, so that she could only dip in the end
of her bill, but could not possibly satisfy her hunger. The Fox lapped it
up very readily, and every now and then, addressing himself to his guest,
desired to know how she liked her entertainment; hoped that everything
was seasoned to her mind, and protested he was very sorry to see her eat
so sparingly. The Stork, perceiving she was played upon, took no notice
of it, but pretended to like every dish extremely; and at parting pressed
the Fox so earnestly to return her visit, that he could not in civility
refuse. The day arrived, and he repaired to his appointment; but to
his great mortification, when dinner appeared, he found it composed of
minced meat, served up in long narrow-necked glasses; so that he was only
tantalized with the sight of what it was impossible for him to taste. The
Stork thrust in her long bill, and helped herself very plentifully; then
turning to Reynard, who was eagerly licking the outside of a jar where
some sauce had been spilled: I am very glad, said she, smiling, that you
seem to have so good an appetite; I hope you will make as hearty a dinner
at my table as I did the other day at yours. Reynard hung down his head,
and looked very much displeased—— Nay, nay, said the Stork, don’t pretend
to be out of humour about the matter; they that cannot take a jest should
never make one. 

_FABLE XLVIII._

The Trees and the Bramble.    _The most worthless persons are generally the most presuming._

The Israelites, ever murmuring and discontented under the reign of
Jehovah, were desirous of having a king, like the rest of the nations.
They offered the kingdom to Gideon, their deliverer; to him, and to his
posterity after him. He generously refused their offer, and reminded
them that Jehovah was their king. When Gideon was dead, Abimelech, his
son by a concubine, slew all his other sons to the number of seventy,
Jotham alone escaping; and by the assistance of the Shechemites made
himself king. Jotham, to represent to them their folly, and to shew them
that the most deserving are generally the least ambitious, whereas the
worthless grasp at power with eagerness, and exercise it with insolence
and tyranny, spake to them in the following manner:

Hearken unto me, ye men of Shechem, so may God hearken unto you. The
Trees, grown weary of the state of freedom and equality in which God
had placed them, consulted together to choose and to anoint a king over
them; and they said to the Olive-tree, Reign thou over us. But the
Olive-tree said unto them, Shall I quit my fatness wherewith God and man
is honoured, to disquiet myself with the cares of government, and to rule
over the Trees? And they said unto the Fig-tree, Come thou and reign over
us. But the Fig-tree said unto them, Shall I bid adieu to my sweetness
and my pleasant fruit, to take upon me the painful charge of royalty, and
to be set over the Trees? Then said the Trees unto the Vine, Come thou
and reign over us. But the Vine said also unto them, Shall I leave my
wine which honoureth God and cheereth man, to bring upon myself nothing
but trouble and anxiety, and to become king of the Trees? we are happy
in our present lot: seek some other to reign over you. Then said all the
Trees unto the Bramble. Come thou and reign over us. And the Bramble said
unto them, I will be your king; come ye all under my shadow and be safe;
obey me, and I will grant you my protection. But if you obey me not,
out of the Bramble shall come forth a fire, which shall devour even the
cedars of Lebanon.


 




PART II.

FABLES, _with Reflections_.
 

_FABLE I._

The Cock and the Jewel.

A brisk young Cock, in company with two or three pullets, his mistresses,
raking upon a Dunghill for something to entertain them with, happened
to scratch up a jewel. He knew what it was well enough, for it sparkled
with an exceeding bright lustre; but, not knowing what to do with it,
endeavoured to cover his ignorance under a gay contempt. So, shrugging
up his wings, shaking his head, and putting on a grimace, he expressed
himself to this purpose: Indeed you are a very fine thing; but I know
not any business you have here. I make no scruple of declaring that my
taste lies quite another way; and I had rather have one grain of dear,
delicious barley, than all the jewels under the sun.     _Several very pretty fellows, who are as great strangers to the    true uses of virtue and knowledge as the Cock upon the Dunghill    is to the real value of the Jewel, endeavour to palliate their    ignorance by pretending that their taste lies another way._  _To fools, the treasures dug from wisdom’s mine_  _Are Jewels thrown to Cocks, and Pearls to Swine._ There are several people in the world that pass, with some, for
well-accomplished gentlemen, and very pretty fellows, though they are
as great strangers to the true uses of virtue and knowledge as the Cock
upon the Dunghill is to the real value of the Jewel. He palliates his
ignorance by pretending that his taste lies another way: But whatever
gallant airs people may give themselves upon these occasions, without
dispute, the solid advantages of virtue, and the durable pleasures of
learning, are as much to be preferred before other objects of the senses
as the finest brilliant diamond is above a barley-corn. The greatest
blockheads would appear to understand what at the same time they affect
to despise; and nobody yet was ever so vicious as to have the impudence
to declare in public that virtue was not a fine thing.

But still, among the idle, sauntering, young fellows of the age, who have
leisure as well to cultivate and improve the faculties of the mind as to
dress and embellish the body, how many are there who spend their days
in raking after new scenes of debauchery, in comparison of those few who
know how to relish more reasonable entertainments! Honest, undesigning
good sense is so unfashionable, that he must be a bold man who at this
time of day attempts to bring it into esteem.

How disappointed is the youth who, in the midst of his amorous pursuits,
endeavouring to plunder an outside of bloom and beauty, finds a treasure
of impenetrable virtue concealed within! And why may it not be said, how
delighted are the fair sex, when, from among a crowd of empty, frolic,
conceited admirers, they find out and distinguish, with their good
opinion, a man of sense, with a plain, unaffected person, which at first
sight they did not like!
 

_FABLE II._

The City Mouse and Country Mouse.

A Country Mouse invited a City Sister of hers to a collation, where
she spared for nothing that the place afforded—as mouldy crusts,
cheese-parings, musty oatmeal, rusty bacon, and the like. The City
Dame was too well bred to find fault with her entertainment; but yet
represented that such a life was unworthy of a merit like hers; and
letting her know how splendidly she lived, invited her to accompany her
to town. The Country Mouse consented, and away they trudged together,
and about midnight got to their journey’s end. The City Mouse shewed her
friend the larder, the pantry, the kitchen, and other offices where she
laid her stores; and after this, carried her into the parlour, where they
found, yet upon the table, the relics of a mighty entertainment of that
very night. The City Mouse carved her companion of what she liked best,
and so to it they fell upon a velvet couch. The Country Mouse, who had
never seen or heard of such doings before, blessed herself at the change
of her condition—when, as ill luck would have it, all on a sudden the
doors flew open, and in comes a crew of noisy servants of both sexes,
to feast upon the dainties that were left. This put the poor mice to
their wits’ end how to save their skins—the stranger especially, who had
never been in such danger before. But she made a shift, however, for
the present to slink into a corner, where she lay trembling and panting
till the company went away. As soon as ever the house was quiet again:
Well, my Court Sister, says she, if this be the sauce to your rich meats,
I’ll e’en back to my cottage and my mouldy cheese again; for I had much
rather lie nibbling of crusts, without fear or hazard, in my own hole,
than be mistress of all the delicacies in the world, and subject to such
terrifying alarms and dangers.     _This fable shews the difference between a Court and a Country    Life: The delights, innocence, and security of the one,    compared with the anxiety, voluptuousness, and hazards of the    other._  _Heav’n in one mould the kindred fate has cast_  _Of men of dignity and mice of taste;_  _Traps, dangers, terrors are alike their lot:_  _Scar’d if they ’scape, and worry’d if they’re caught._ How infinitely superior are the delights of a private life to the noise
and bustle of a public one! Innocence, security, meditation, good air,
health, and unbroken rest, are the blessings of the one; while the rages
of lust and wine, noise, hurry, circumvention, falsehood, treachery,
confusion, and ill health, are the constant attendants of the other.

The splendour and luxury of a court are but a poor recompense for
the slavish attendances, the invidious competitions, and the mortal
disappointments that accompany it. The uncertain favour of Princes, and
the envy of those who judge by hearsay or appearance, without either
reason or truth, make even the best sort of court lives miserable, to
say nothing of the innumerable temptations, vices, and excesses of a
life of pomp and pleasure. Let a man but set the pleasing of his palate
against the surfeits of gluttony and excess; the starving of his mind
against a pampered carcase; the restless importunities of tale-bearers
and back-friends against fair words and professions, only from the teeth
outwards; let him, I say, but set the one in balance against the other,
and he shall find himself miserable, even in the very height of his
delights. To say all in a word: Let him but set the comforts of a life
spent in noise, formality, and tumult, against the blessings of a retreat
with competency and freedom, and then cast up his account.

What man, then, that is not stark mad, will voluntarily expose himself
to the imperious brow-beatings and scorns of great men! To have a dagger
struck to his heart in an embrace! To be torn to pieces by calumny; nay,
to be a knave in his own defence! For the honester, the more dangerous in
a vicious age, and where it is a crime not to be like the company. Men of
that character are not to be read and understood by their words, but by
their interests; their promises and protestations are no longer binding
than while they are profitable to them.

After all, to keep the fable more closely in view, let a man, with the
Country Mouse, reflect on the peace and safety of rural retirement, and
prefer, if he can, the insecurity, noise, and hurry of a more exalted
fortune. 

_FABLE III._

The Fox and the Crow.

A Crow having taken a piece of cheese out of a cottage window, flew up
into a high tree with it, in order to eat it. Which a Fox observing, came
and sat underneath, and began to compliment the Crow upon the subject
of her beauty. I protest, says he, I never observed it before, but your
feathers are of a more delicate white than any that ever I saw in my
life! Ah! what a fine shape and graceful turn of body is there! And I
make no question but you have a tolerable voice. If it is but as fine
as your complexion, I do not know a bird that can pretend to stand in
competition with you. The Crow, tickled with this very civil language,
nestled and wriggled about, and hardly knew where she was; but thinking
the Fox a little dubious as to the particular of her voice, and having
a mind to set him right in that matter, began to sing, and, in the same
instant, let the cheese drop out of her mouth;—which the Fox presently
chopt up, and then bade her remember that whatever he had said of her
beauty, he had spoken nothing yet of her brains.     _There is hardly any man living that may not be wrought upon    more or less by flattery; for we do all of us naturally    overween in our own favour. But when it comes to be applied    once to a vain fool, there is no end then can be proposed to be    attained by it, but may be effected._  _“It is a maxim in the schools,_  _That ~Flattery’s the food of fools~:”_  _And whoso likes such airy meat_  _Will soon have nothing else to eat._ Flattery in itself is an unmanly, slavish vice; but it is much worse yet
for the alliance it has to hypocrisy; for while we make other people
think better of _themselves_ than _they_ deserve, we make them think
better of _us_ too than _we_ deserve: For self-love and vanity on the one
hand, assists the falseness and confidence on the other, while it serves
to confirm weak minds in the opinion they had of themselves before,
and makes them parties effectually in a conspiracy to their own ruin.
The only benefit or good of Flattery is this; that by hearing what we
_are not_, we may be instructed what we _ought to be_. Yet how few are
there among the whole race of mankind, who may be said to be full proof
against its attacks! The gross way by which it is managed by some silly
practitioners, is enough to alarm the dullest apprehension, and make it
to value itself upon the quickness of its insight into the little plots
of this nature. But, let the ambuscade be disposed with due judgment,
and it will scarce fail of seizing the most guarded heart. How many are
tickled to the last degree with the pleasure of Flattery, even while
they are applauded for their honest detestation of it! There is no way to
baffle the force of this engine, but by every one’s examining impartially
for himself the true estimate of his own qualities: If he deals sincerely
in the matter, nobody can tell so well as himself what degree of esteem
ought to attend any of his actions; and therefore he should be entirely
easy as to the opinion men are like to have of them in the world. If
they attribute more to him than is his due, they are either designing or
mistaken; if they allow him less, they are envious, or, possibly, still
mistaken; and, in either case, are to be despised, or disregarded. For
he that flatters without designing to make advantage of it, is a fool:
And whoever encourages that Flattery, which he has sense enough to see
through, is a vain coxcomb.
 

_FABLE IV._

An Ass, an Ape, and a Mole.

An Ass and an Ape were conferring on grievances. The Ass complained
mightily for want of horns, and the Ape was as much troubled for want
of a tail. Hold your tongues, both of ye, says the Mole, and be thankful
for what you have; for the poor blind Moles are in a worse condition than
either of ye.
 

_FABLE V._

The Hares and the Frogs.

Once upon a time the Hares found themselves mightily unsatisfied with the
miserable condition they lived in. Here we live, says one of them, at
the mercy of men, dogs, eagles, and I know not how many other creatures,
which prey upon us at pleasure; perpetually in frights, perpetually in
danger; and therefore I am absolutely of opinion, that we had better die
once for all, than live at this rate in a continual dread that’s worse
than death itself. The motion was seconded and debated, and a resolution
immediately taken, by one and all, to drown themselves. The vote was no
sooner passed, but away they scudded with that determination to the next
lake. Upon this hurry there leapt a whole shoal of Frogs from the bank
into the water, for fear of the Hares. Nay then, my masters, says one
of the gravest of the company, pray let’s have a little patience. Our
condition, I find, is not altogether so bad as we fancied it; for there
are those, you see, that are as much afraid of us as we are of others.


MORALS of the two Fables.    _There is no contending with the Orders and Decrees of    Providence. He that makes us, knows what is fittest for us;    and every man’s own lot (well understood and managed) is    undoubtedly the best._  _The miseries of half mankind unknown,_  _Fools vainly think no sorrows like their own:_  _But view the world, and you will learn to bear_  _Misfortunes well, since all men have their share._ Since nature provides for the necessities of all creatures, and for the
well-being of every one in its kind; and since it is not in the power of
any creature to make itself other than what by Providence it was designed
to be; what a madness is it to wish ourselves other than what we are, and
what we must continue to be! Every atom of the creation has its place
assigned: every creature has its proper figure, and there is no disputing
with Him that made it so. _Why have I not this?_ and, _Why have I not
that?_ are questions for a Philosopher of _Bedlam_ to ask; and we may
as well cavil at the motions of the heavens, the vicissitude of day and
night, and the succession of the seasons, as expostulate with Providence
upon any of the rest of God’s works. The _Ass_ would have _horns_, the
_Ape_ would have a _tail_, and the _Hares_ would be free from those
terrors which, timid as they are, they give to others: but the _Mole_ on
the one hand, and the _Frogs_ on the other, shew that there are others as
miserable as themselves.

It may seem to be a kind of a malicious satisfaction that one man derives
from the misfortune of another. But the philosophy of this reflection
stands upon another ground; for our comfort does not arise from other
people being miserable, but from this inference upon the balance, that we
suffer only the lot of human nature: and as we are happy or miserable,
compared with others; so other people are miserable or happy, compared
with us; by which justice of Providence we come to be convinced of the
sin, and the mistake, of our ingratitude. What would not a man give to be
eased of the gout, or the stone? or, supposing an incurable poverty on
the one hand, and an incurable malady on the other, why should not the
poor man think himself happier in his rags, than the other in his purple?
but the rich man envies the poor man’s _health_, without considering
his _want_; and the poor man envies the other’s _treasure_, without
considering his _diseases_. What is an ill name in the world to a good
conscience within one’s self; and how much less miserable, upon the
wheel, is one man that is innocent, than another under the same torture
that is guilty? The only way for Hares and Asses, is to be thankful what
they are, and what they have, and not to grumble at the lot that they
must bear in spite of their teeth.
 

_FABLE VI._

An Ant and Fly.

Where’s the honour or the pleasure in the world, says the Fly, in a
dispute for preeminence with the Ant, that I have not my part in? Are
not all temples and places open to me? Am not I the taster to gods and
princes in all their sacrifices and entertainments? And all this without
either money or pains? I trample upon crowns, and kiss what ladies’
lips I please. And what have you now to pretend to all this while? Vain
boaster! says the Ant, dost thou not know the difference between the
access of a _guest_, and that of an _intruder_? for people are so far
from liking your company, that they kill you as soon as they catch you.
You are a plague to them wherever you come. Your very breath has maggots
in it; and for the kiss you brag of, what is it but the perfume of the
last dunghill you touched upon, once removed? For my part, I live upon
what’s my own, and work honestly in the summer to maintain myself in the
winter; whereas the whole course of your scandalous life is only cheating
or sharping one half of the year, and starving the other.     _The happiness of life does not lie so much in enjoying small    advantages, as in living free from great inconveniences. An    honest mediocrity is the happiest state a man can wish for._  _Pert coxcombs, pleas’d with buzzing round the fair,_  _Laugh at the low mechanic’s thrifty care;_  _While he with juster scorn may well deride_  _Their folly, meanness, indolence, and pride._ This fable marks out to us the difference betwixt the empty vanity or
ostentation, and the substantial ornaments of virtue. A man can hardly
fancy to himself a truer image of a plain, honest, country simplicity,
than the Ant’s part of the dialogue in this fable. She takes pains for
what she eats; wrongs nobody; and so creates no enemies; she wants
nothing; and she boasts of nothing; lives contented with her own, and
enjoys all with a good conscience. This emblem recommends to us the
blessings of a virtuous privacy, according to the just measures of right
nature, and, in few words, comprises the sum of a happy state.

The Fly, on the contrary, leads a lazy, voluptuous, scandalous, sharking
life; is hated wherever she comes, and in perpetual fears and dangers.
She justly may be compared with the worthless part of mankind, who
pass through the world without being of any service in it; and without
acquiring the least reputation, seldom fail of adding pride to all
their other failings, and behave with haughtiness and arrogance towards
those who contribute to the comfort and happiness of society. They
treat industrious persons as wretched drudges, appointed to labour for
a poor subsistence; while Heaven has provided everything for their own
use, though they of all others least deserve it. But the worthy and
industrious may always comfort themselves with this reflection, that the
pride and extravagance of these idle creatures will at last bring them to
shame and want, while their own honest labours will secure to them a life
of plenty and affluence.

It is true she flutters from place to place, from feast to feast, brags
of her interest at court, and of ladies’ favours: and what is this
miserable insect at last, but the very picture of one of our ordinary
trencher Esquires, that spends his time in hopping from the table of one
great man to that of another, only to pick up scraps of intelligence, and
to spoil good company; at other times officiously skipping up and down
from levee to levee, and endeavouring to make himself necessary, wherever
he thinks fit to be troublesome.
 

_FABLE VII._

A Horse and an Ass.

A proud pampered Horse, bedecked with gaudy trappings, met in his course
a poor creeping Ass, under a heavy burden, that had chopt into the same
track with him. Why, how now, sirrah, says he, do you not see by these
arms and trappings to what master I belong? and do you not understand,
that when I have that master of mine upon my back, the whole weight of
the state rests upon my shoulders? Out of the way, thou slavish insolent
animal, or I’ll tread thee to dirt. The wretched Ass immediately slunk
aside, with this envious reflection between his teeth, _What would I give
to change conditions with that happy creature there!_ This fancy would
not out of the head of him, till it was his hap, a little while after, to
see this very Horse doing drudgery in a common dung-cart. Why, how now,
friend, says the Ass, how comes this about? Only the chance of war, says
the other: I was a General’s horse, you must know; and my master carried
me into a battle, where I was hacked and maimed; and you have here before
your eyes the catastrophe of my fortune.     _This Fable shews the folly and the fate of pride and    arrogance; and the mistake of placing happiness in anything    that may be taken away; as also the blessing of freedom in a    mean estate._  _Proud of the clothes with which you are equipt,_  _You of your pride may easily be stript._ People would never envy the pomp and splendour of greatness, if they
did but consider either the cares and dangers that go along with it,
or the blessings of peace and security in a middle condition. No man
can be truly happy, who is not every hour of his life prepared for the
worst that can befall him. Now this is a state of tranquillity never to
be attained but by keeping perpetually in our thoughts the certainty of
death, and the lubricity of fortune; and by delivering ourselves from the
anxiety of hopes and fears.

It falls naturally within the prospect of this fiction to treat of the
wickedness of a presumptuous arrogance; the fate that attends it; the
rise of it; and the means of either preventing or suppressing it; the
folly of it; the wretched and ridiculous estate of a proud man, and the
weakness of that envy that is grounded upon the mistaken happiness of
human life.

The folly both of the Horse and Ass may be considered here; the one
in placing his happiness upon anything that could be taken away; and
the other, in envying that mistaken happiness, under the abuse of the
same splendid illusion and imposture. What signify gay furniture, and a
pampered carcase, or any other outward appearance, without an intrinsic
value of worth and virtue? what signify beauty, strength, youth, fortune,
embroidered furniture, gaudy bosses, or any of those temporary and
uncertain satisfactions that may be taken from us with the very next
breath we draw? what assurance can any man have of a possession that
every turn of state, every puff of air, every change of humour, and the
least of a million of common casualties, may deprive him of?

Moreover, the envy of the Ass was a double folly; for he mistakes both
the Horse’s condition and his own. ’Tis madness to envy any creature that
may in a moment become miserable, or for any advantage that may in a
moment be taken from him. The Ass envies the Horse to-day; and, in some
few days more, the Horse comes to envy him: wherefore let no man despair,
so long as it is in the power either of death, or of chance, to remove
the burden. Nothing but moderation and greatness of mind can make either
a prosperous or an adverse fortune easy to us. The only way to be happy
is to submit to our lot; for no man can be properly said to be miserable
that is not wanting to himself. It is certainly true, that many a poor
cobbler has a merrier heart in his stall, than a prince in his palace.
 

_FABLE VIII._

An Husbandman and Stork.

A poor innocent Stork had the ill hap to be taken in a net that was laid
for geese and cranes. The Stork’s plea for herself was simplicity and
piety, the love she bore to mankind, her duty to her parents, and the
service she did in picking up venomous creatures. This may be all true,
says the Husbandman, for what I know; but as you have been taken with ill
company, you must expect to suffer with it.     _Our fortune and reputation require us to keep good company;    for as we may be easily perverted by the force of bad examples,    wise men will judge of us by the company we keep. What says the    proverb? ~Birds of a feather will flock together.~_  _The youth to temperance in vain pretends,_  _Who goes to taverns, and makes rakes his friends:_  _As maidens, who would live without a stain,_  _Should never choose to lodge in ~Drury-Lane~._ The world will always form an idea of the character of every man from his
associates. Nor is this rule founded on wrong principles; for, generally
speaking, those who are constant companions are either drawn together
from a similitude of manners, or from such a similitude to each other by
daily commerce and continual conversation.

If bad company had nothing else to make us shun and avoid it, this,
methinks, might be sufficient, _that it infects and taints a man’s
reputation to as great a degree as if he were thoroughly versed in the
wickedness of the whole gang_. What is it to me if the thief who robs me
of my money gives part of it to build a church? Is he ever the less a
thief? Shall a woman’s going to prayers twice a day, save her reputation,
if she is known to be a malicious lying gossip? No; such mixtures of
religion and sin make the offence but the more flagrant, as they convince
us that it was not committed out of ignorance. Indeed, there is no living
without being guilty of some faults, more or less; which the world ought
to be good-natured enough to overlook, in consideration of the general
frailty of mankind, when they are not too gross and too abundant. But,
when we are so abandoned to stupidity, and a neglect of our reputation,
as to keep bad company, however little we may be criminal in reality,
we must expect the same censure and punishment as is due to the most
notorious of our companions.
 

_FABLE IX._

The Dog and the Shadow.

A Dog, crossing a little rivulet with a piece of flesh in his mouth, saw
his own shadow represented in the clear mirror of the limpid stream; and
believing it to be another Dog who was carrying another piece of flesh,
he could not forbear catching at it; but was so far from getting anything
by his greedy design, that he dropt the piece he had in his mouth, which
immediately sunk to the bottom, and was irrecoverably lost.     _Excessive greediness mostly in the end misses what it aims    at; disorderly appetites seldom obtain what they would have;    passions mislead men, and often bring them into great straits    and inconveniences, through heedlessness and negligence._  _Base is the man who pines amidst his store,_  _And fat with plenty, griping, covets more:_  _But doubly vile, by av’rice when betray’d,_  _He quits the substance for an empty shade._ It is wisely decreed that vice should carry its own punishment along
with it. Therefore he that catches at more than belongs to him, justly
deserves to lose what he has; yet nothing is more common, and, at the
same time, more pernicious, than this selfish principle. It prevails from
the king to the peasant; and all orders and degrees of men are, more
or less, infected with it. Great monarchs have been drawn in, by this
greedy humour, to grasp at the dominions of their neighbours; not that
they wanted anything more to feed their luxury, but to gratify their
insatiable appetite for vainglory. If the Kings of _Persia_ could have
been contented with their own vast territories, they had not lost all
_Asia_, for the sake of a little petty state of _Greece_. And _France_,
with all its glory, has, ere now, been reduced to the last extremity by
the same unjust incroachments.

He that thinks he sees another’s estate in a pack of cards, or a box and
dice, and ventures his own in the pursuit of it, should not repine if he
finds himself a beggar in the end. 

_FABLE X._

A Peacock and a Crane.

As a Peacock and a Crane were in company together, the Peacock spread his
tail, and challenged the other to shew him such a fan of feathers. You
brag of your plumes, says the Crane, that are fair indeed to the eye, but
fit for nothing but to attract the eyes of children and fools. Do as I
do, if you can; and then, with a suitable contempt, he springs up into
the air, leaving the gaping Peacock staring after him till his eyes ached.     _There cannot be a greater sign of a weak mind than a person’s    valuing himself on a gaudy outside; whether it be on the    beauties of person, or the still vainer pride of fine clothes._  _Worth makes the man, and want of it the fellow,_  _The rest is all but leather or prunella._ It is very absurd to slight or insult another upon his wanting a property
which we possess; for he may, for anything we know, have as just reason
to triumph over us, by being master of some good quality of which we are
incapable. But, in regard to the fable before us, that which the Peacock
values himself upon, the glitter and finery of dress, is one of the
most trifling considerations in nature; and what a man of sense would
be ashamed to reckon even as the least part of merit. Indeed, children,
and those people who think much about the same pitch with them, are apt
to be taken with varnish and tinsel; but they who examine by the scale
of common sense, must find something of weight and substance before they
can be persuaded to set a value. The mind which is stored with virtuous
and rational sentiments, and the behaviour which speaks complacence
and humility, stamp an estimate upon the possessor which all judicious
spectators are ready to admire and acknowledge. But if there be any merit
in an embroidered coat, a brocade waistcoat, a shoe, a stocking, or a
sword-knot, the person who wears them has the least claim to it; let it
be ascribed where it justly belongs—to the several artisans who wrought
and disposed the materials of which they consist. This moral is not
intended to derogate anything from the magnificence of fine clothes and
rich equipages, which, as times and circumstances require, may be used
with decency and propriety enough. But one cannot help being concerned
lest any worth should be affixed to them more than their own intrinsic
value.
 

_FABLE XI._

A Boy and False Alarms.

A Shepherd’s Boy kept his sheep upon a common, and in sport and
wantonness had gotten a roguish trick of crying, A wolf! a wolf! when
there was no such matter, and fooling the country people with false
alarms. He had been at this sport so many times in jest, that they would
not believe him at last when he was in earnest; and so the wolves broke
in upon the flock, and worried the sheep without resistance.     _This fable shews us the dangerous consequences of an improper    and unseasonable fooling. The old moral observes, that a common    liar shall not be believed, even when he speaks true._  _Rank lies repeated oft, and oft detected,_  _Makes truth itself for a rank lie suspected._ It is not every man’s talent to know when and how to cast out a pleasant
word, with such a regard to modesty and respect as not to transgress the
true and fair allowances of wit, good-nature, and good breeding. The
skill and faculty of governing this freedom within the terms of sobriety
and discretion, goes a great way in the character of an agreeable
companion: for that which we call raillery, in this sense, is the very
sauce of civil entertainment; and without some such tincture of urbanity,
even in matters the most serious, the good-humour falters for want of
refreshment and relief; but there is a _medium_ yet betwixt _all-fool_
and _all-philosopher_; I mean a proper and discreet mixture, that in
some sort partakes of both, and renders wisdom itself so much the more
grateful and effectual. The gravity, in short, of the one is enlivened
with the spirit and quickness of the other; and the gaiety of a diverting
word serves as a vehicle to convey the force of the intent and meaning of
it.

The Shepherd’s Boy, in short, to come closer to the fable, went too far
upon a topic he did not understand. And he that is detected for being a
notorious liar, besides the ignominy and reproach of the thing, incurs
this mischief, that he will scarce be able to get any one to believe him
again as long as he lives. However true our complaint may be, or how much
soever it may be for our interest to have it believed, yet, if we have
been frequently caught tripping before, we shall hardly be able to gain
credit to what we relate afterwards. Though mankind are generally stupid
enough to be often imposed upon, yet few are so senseless as to believe a
notorious liar, or to trust a cheat upon record. These little shams, when
found out, are sufficiently prejudicial to the interest of every private
person who practises them. But, when we are alarmed with imaginary
dangers in respect of the public, till the cry grows quite stale and
threadbare, how can it be expected we should know when to guard ourselves
against real ones.
 

_FABLE XII._

A Father and his Sons.

A very honest man happened to have a contentious brood of children. He
called for a rod, and bade them try one after another, with all their
force, if they could break it. They tried, and could not. Well, says he,
unbind it now, and take every twig of it apart, and see what you can do
that way. They did so, and with great ease, by one and one, they snapped
it all to pieces. This, says he, is the true emblem of your condition:
keep together, and you are safe; divide, and you are undone.     _The breach of unity puts the world into a state of war, and    turns every man’s hand against his brother; but so long as that    band holds, it is the strength of all the several parts of it    gathered into one, and is not easily subdued._  _Distress and ruin on divisions wait,_  _But union is the bond of ev’ry state;_  _Disloyalty’s a plague, dissension’s worse,_  _And parties, where they rage, a kingdom’s curse._ This fable imitates the force of union, and the danger of division.
Intestine commotions have destroyed many a powerful state; and it is as
ruinous in private affairs as it is in public. A divided family can no
more stand than a divided commonwealth; for every individual suffers in
the neglect of a common safety. It is a strange thing that men should not
do that under the government of rational spirit, and a natural prudence,
which wolves and bears do by the impulse of an animal instinct. For they,
we see, will make head, one and all, against a common enemy; whereas the
generality of mankind lie pecking at one another, till one by one they
are all torn to pieces, never considering (as this fable teaches) the
necessity and benefits of union.
 

_FABLE XIII._

The Sick Father and his Children.

A Countryman who had lived handsomely in the world upon his honest labour
and industry, was desirous his Sons should do so after him; and being now
upon his death-bed, My dear children, says he, I reckon myself bound to
tell you before I depart, that there is a considerable treasure hid in
my vineyard; wherefore pray be sure to dig, and search narrowly for it,
when I am gone. The Father dies, and the Sons fall immediately to work
upon the vineyard. They turned it up over and over, and not one penny of
money to be found there; but the profit of the next vintage expounded the
riddle.     _Good counsel is the best legacy a Father can leave to a Child;    and it is still the better, when it is so wrapt up, as to beget    a curiosity as well as an inclination to follow it._  _Assiduous pains the swelling coffers fill,_  _And all may make their fortune, if they will._ There is no wealth like that which comes by the blessing of God upon
honest labour and warrantable industry. Here is an incitement to an
industrious course of life, by a consideration of the profit, the
innocence, and the virtue of such an application. There is one great
comfort in hand, besides the hope and assurance of more to come. It was
a touch of art in the Father to cover his meaning in such a manner as to
create a curiosity and an earnest desire in his Sons to find it out. And
it was a treble advantage to them besides; for there was health in the
exercise, profit in the discovery, and the comfort of a good conscience
in discharging the duty of a filial obedience. 

_FABLE XIV._

The Stag looking into the Water.

A Stag that had been drinking at a clear spring, saw himself in the
water; and, pleased with the prospect, stood afterwards for some time
contemplating and surveying his shape and features, from head to
foot. Ah! says he, what a glorious pair of branching horns are there!
how gracefully do those antlers hang over my forehead, and give an
agreeable turn to my whole face! If some other parts of my body were but
proportionable to them, I would turn my back to nobody; but I have a set
of such legs as really makes me ashamed to see them. People may talk what
they please of their conveniences, and what great need we stand in of
them upon several occasions; but for my part, I find them so very slender
and unsightly, that I had as lief have none at all. While he was giving
himself these airs, he was alarmed with the noise of some Huntsmen and a
pack of hounds that had been just laid on upon the scent, and were making
towards him. Away he flies in some consternation, and, bounding nimbly
over the plain, threw dogs and men at a vast distance behind him. After
which, taking a very thick copse, he had the ill-fortune to be entangled
by his horns in a thicket; where he was held fast, till the hounds came
in and pulled him down. Finding now how it was like to go with him, in
the pangs of death, he is said to have uttered these words: Unhappy
creature that I am! I am too late convinced, that what I prided myself in
has been the cause of my undoing; and what I so much disliked, was the
only thing that could have saved me.     _We should examine things deliberately, and candidly consider    their real usefulness before we place our esteem on them;    otherwise, like the foolish Stag, we may happen to admire those    accomplishments which are of no real use, and often prove    prejudicial to us, while we despise those things on which our    safety may depend._  _Virtue despised, the beauty views her face,_  _And pleased beholds an angel in her glass;_  _But lost at length, to shame and want resigned,_  _Mourns she ne’er sought the beauty of the mind._ Perhaps we cannot apply this better, than by supposing the fable to be a
parable; which may be thus explained. The Deer, viewing itself in the
water, is a beautiful young lady at her looking-glass. She can’t help
being sensible of the charms which lie blooming in every feature of her
face. She moistens her lips, languishes with her eyes, adjusts every
lock of her hair with the nicest exactness, gives an agreeable attitude
to her whole body, and then, with a soft sigh, says to herself, Ah! how
happy might I be, in a daily crowd of admirers, if it were not for the
censoriousness of the age! When I view that face, where Nature, to give
her her due, has been liberal enough of charms, how easy should I be, if
it were not for that slender particular, my honour. The odious idea of
that comes across all my happy moments, and brings a mortification with
it that damps my most flattering tender hopes. Oh that there were no such
thing in the world! In the midst of these soliloquies, she is interrupted
by the voice of her lover, who enters her chamber singing a rigadoon air;
and, introducing his discourse in a familiar easy manner, takes occasion
to launch out in praise of her beauty, sees she is pleased with it,
snatches her hand, kisses it in a transport; and in short, pursues his
point so close, that she is not able to disengage herself from him. But,
when the consequence of all this approaches, in an agony of grief and
shame, she fetches a deep sigh, and says, “Ah! how mistaken have I been!
the virtue I slighted might have saved me; but the beauty I prized so
much has been my undoing.”
 

_FABLE XV._

The Countryman and the Snake.

A Villager, in a frosty, snowy winter, found a Snake under a hedge,
almost dead with cold. He could not help having compassion for the poor
creature, so brought it home, and laid it upon the hearth near the fire;
but it had not lain there long before (being revived with the heat) it
began to erect itself, and fly at his wife and children, filling the
whole cottage with dreadful hissings. The countryman hearing an outcry,
and perceiving what the matter was, catched up a mattock, and soon
dispatched him, upbraiding him at the same time in these words: “Is this,
vile wretch, the reward you make to him that saved your life? Die, as you
deserve; but a single death is too good for you.”     _It is no strange thing to see a reprobate fool throw his    poisonous language about against those who are so inadvertent    as to concern themselves with him._  _Evil for good, relentless to bestow,_  _Is all the gratitude th’ unworthy know;_  _Mercy to such should be with caution shown;_  _Saving a villain’s life, you risk your own._ ’Tis the nature of ingrates to return evil for good; and the moralists in
all ages have incessantly declaimed against the enormity of this crime,
concluding _that they who are capable of hurting their benefactors,
are not fit to live in a community; being such, as the natural ties of
parent, friend, or country, are too weak to restrain within the bounds
of society_. Indeed, the sin of ingratitude is so detestable, that, as
none but the most inhuman temper can be guilty of it, so, in writing to
men, there is no occasion to use many words, either in exposing the vice
itself, or dissuading people from the commission of it. Therefore it is
not likely that a person of _Æsop’s_ sagacity would have compiled this
fable, without having something else in view, besides this trite and
obvious subject. He certainly intended to put us in mind, _That, as none
but a poor silly clown would go to take up a Snake and cherish it, so we
shall be very negligent and ill-advised, if, in doing good offices, we do
not take care to bestow our benevolence upon proper objects_. It was not
at all unnatural in the Snake to hiss, and brandish his tongue, and fly
at the first that came near him; as soon at the person that saved his
life as any other; indeed more likely, because nobody else had so much
to do with him. Nor is it strange at any time to see a reprobate fool
throwing his poisonous language about, and committing his extravagances
against those, more especially, who are so inadvertent as to concern
themselves with him. The snake and the reprobate will not appear
extraordinary in their malevolence. But the sensible part of mankind
cannot help thinking those guilty of great indiscretion who receive
either of them into their protection.
 

_FABLE XVI._

A Gnat and a Bee.

A Gnat, half starved with cold and hunger, went one frosty morning to
a Bee-hive, to beg a charity; and offered to teach music in the Bee’s
family, for her diet and lodging. The Bee very civilly desired to be
excused: For, says she, I bring up all my children to my own trade, that
they may be able to get their living by their industry; and I am sure I
am right; for see what that music, which you would I teach my children,
has brought you yourself to.     _Industry ought to be diligently inculcated in the minds of    children of all ranks and degrees; for who stands so sure as to    say he is exempt from the vicissitudes of this uncertain life?_  _The wretch who works not for his daily bread,_  _Sighs and complains, but ought not to be fed._  _Think, when you see stout beggars on their stand,_  _The lazy are the locusts of the land._ The many unhappy persons whom we daily see singing up and down in order
to divert other people, though with very heavy hearts of their own,
should warn all those who have the education of children, how necessary
it is to bring them up to industry and business, be their present
prospects ever so hopeful; that so, upon any unexpected disaster, they
might be able to turn their hands to a course which might procure them an
honest livelihood.

The Gnat in the fable, we may further observe, is very like many
inconsiderate persons in life. They gaily buz about in the _summer of
prosperity_, and think of nothing but their present enjoyments: but
when the _winter of adversity_ comes, they poorly creep about, and
supplicate the industrious inhabitants of every _Bee-hive_, charitably to
relieve those wants which they have brought upon themselves; and often
deservedly meet the repulse, and the sting, which the Bee gives to the
Gnat in the fable. We have seen many a doted-on child, who has been
brought up to singing, dancing, and all the gay delights of this world,
and yet has been forced to shut up the last scene of a miserable life in
want and beggary; which had been prevented, if they had been early taught
the value of industry and independency, and the means, by the former, of
attaining the latter.
 

_FABLE XVII._

Mercury and the Woodman.

A Man was felling a tree on the bank of a river; and by chance let his
hatchet slip out of his hand, which dropt into the water, and immediately
sunk to the bottom. Being therefore in great distress for the loss of
his tool, he sat down and bemoaned himself most lamentably. Upon this,
_Mercury_ appeared to him, and, being informed of the cause of his
complaint, dived to the bottom of the river, and coming up again, showed
the man a golden hatchet, demanding if that were his. He denied that it
was. Upon which _Mercury_ dived a second time, and brought up a silver
one. The man refused it, alleging likewise that this was not his. He
dived a third time, and fetched up the individual hatchet the man had
lost; upon sight of which the poor wretch was overjoyed, and took it with
all humility and thankfulness. _Mercury_ was so pleased with the fellow’s
honesty, that he gave him the other two into the bargain, as a reward
for his just dealing. The man goes to his companions, and giving them an
account of what had happened, one of them went presently to the river’s
side, and let his hatchet fall designedly into the stream. Then sitting
down upon the bank, he fell a weeping and lamenting, as if he had been
really and sorely afflicted. _Mercury_ appeared as before, and diving,
brought him up a golden hatchet, asking if that was the hatchet he lost.
Transported at the precious metal, he answered, Yes; and went to snatch
it greedily. But the god detesting his abominable impudence, not only
refused to give him that, but would not so much as let him have his own
hatchet again.     _Honesty is the best policy; religion absolutely requires it of    its votaries: and the honest man, provided his other talents    are not deficient, always carries the preference in our esteem,    before any other, in whatever business he employs himself._  _Truth, sacred truth, shall flourish and prevail,_  _While all the arts of fraud and falsehood fail;_  _The flimsy cheat wise judges soon descry;_  _Sure those will rob, who scruple not to lie._ Notwithstanding the proneness of mankind to do evil, and the account
which some find in playing the knave, yet there cannot be invented
a more true and reasonable maxim, than that by which we are assured
that _honesty is the best policy_. If we consider it in respect to the
other world, there never was a religion but strictly required it of its
votaries. If we examine it upon account of this, we shall find that the
honest man, provided his other talents are not deficient, always carries
the preference in our esteem, before any other, in whatever business he
thinks fit to employ himself.
 
The Fir and a Bramble.

My head, says the boasting Fir-tree to the humble Bramble, is advanced
among the stars; I furnish beams for palaces, and masts for shipping;
the very sweat of my body is a sovereign remedy for the sick and wounded:
whereas thou, O rascally Bramble, runnest creeping in the dirt, and art
good for nothing in the world but mischief. I pretend not to vie with
thee, said the Bramble, in the points thou gloriest in. But, not to
insist upon it, that He who made thee a lofty Fir, could have made thee
an humble Bramble, I pray thee tell me, when the Carpenter comes next
with the axe into the wood, to fell timber, whether thou hadst not rather
be a Bramble than a Fir-tree?     _Poverty secures a man from many dangers; whereas the rich and    the mighty are the mark of malice and cross fortune; and still    the higher they are, the nearer the thunder._  _Minions of fortune, pillars of the state,_    _Round your exalted heads what tempests low’r!_  _While peace secure, and soft contentment wait_    _On the calm mansions of the humble poor._ The answer of the humble Bramble to the proud Fir-tree is so pathetic,
that it may of itself serve for a very good moral to this fable. Nothing
of God’s works is so mean as to be despised, and nothing so lofty but it
may be humbled; nay, and the greater the height the greater the danger.
For a proud great man to despise an humble little one, when Providence
can so easily exalt the one, and abase the other, and has not for the
merit of the one, or the demerit of the other, conferred the respective
conditions, is a most inexcusable arrogance: and history has given
numberless instances, where the overgrown Fir, though a Prime Minister,
or great Prince, in the very height of its pride, has been forced to
submit to the executioner’s axe, while the humble Bramble, or contented
poor man, has continued safe and unhurt in his lowly obscurity. We may
further observe on this fable, that there is no state of life but has
its mixture of good and evil. The Fir may boast of the uses to which it
is put, and of its strength and stature; but then it has not to boast
of the creeping Bramble’s safety; for the value of the one tempts the
Carpenter’s axe, while the poverty of the other makes it little worth any
one’s while to molest it. Upon the whole matter, we may add, _That as
pride or arrogance is a vice that seldom escapes without a punishment; so
humility is a virtue that hardly ever goes without a blessing_.  

The Fox and the Countryman.

A Fox being hard hunted, and having run a long chase, was quite tired. At
last he spied a country fellow in a wood, to whom he applied for refuge,
entreating that he would give him leave to hide himself in his cottage,
till the hounds were gone by. The man consented, and the Fox went and
covered himself up close in a corner of the hovel. Presently the hunters
came up, and inquired of the man, if he had seen the Fox. No, says he, I
have not seen him indeed: but all the while he pointed with his finger to
the place where the Fox was hid. However, the hunters did not understand
him, but called off their hounds, and went another way. Soon after, the
Fox, creeping out of his hole, was going to sneak off; when the man,
calling after him, asked him, if that was his manners, to go away without
thanking his benefactor, to whose fidelity he owed his life. _Reynard_,
who had peeped all the while, and seen what passed, answered, I know what
obligations I have to you well enough; and I assure you, if your actions
had but been agreeable to your words, I should have endeavoured, however
incapable of it, to have returned you suitable thanks.     _To appear in another’s interest, while underhand we are giving    intelligence to their enemies, is treacherous, knavish, and    base._  _Thus by the knave, in worldly guile adept,_  _Vows are perform’d and promises are kept:_  _True to the form, and fearful of offence,_  _Good soul! he swerves from nothing but the sense._ Sincerity is a most beautiful virtue: but there are some, whose natures
are so poor-spirited and cowardly, that they are not capable of exerting
it. Indeed, unless a man be steady and constant in all his actions, he
will hardly deserve the name of sincere. An open enemy, though more
violent and terrible, is not, however, so odious and detestable as a
false friend. To pretend to keep another’s counsel, and appear in their
interest, while underhand we are giving intelligence to their enemies,
is treacherous, knavish, and base. There are some people in the world
very dexterous at this kind of defamation; and can, while they seem most
vehement in the commendation or defence of a friend, throw out a hint
which shall stab their reputation deeper than the most malicious weapon,
brandished at them in a public manner, could have been capable of doing. 
A One-Eyed Stag.

A One-Eyed Stag that was afraid of the Huntsmen at land, kept a watch
that way, and fed with his blind side towards an arm of the sea, where he
thought there was no danger. In this hope of security, he was shot, by a
ball from a boat, and so ended his days with this lamentation: Here I am
destroyed, says he, where I reckoned myself to be safe on the one hand;
and no evil has befallen me, where I most dreaded it, on the other. But
it is my comfort that I intended the best.     _We are liable to many accidents that no care or foresight    can prevent: but we are to provide, however, the best we can    against them, and leave the rest to Providence._  _The man whom we fear and suspect for a cheat,_  _Can hardly delude us with art and deceit;_  _But he, in whose faith we securely confide,_  _May come round with impunity on our ~blind side~._ We are many times preserved or destroyed by those accidents or counsels
that in all probability should have had quite contrary effects. But
yet it is our part to act according to reason, and commit ourselves to
Heaven for the rest. The wisest of men have their _follies_ or _blind
sides_, and have their enemies too, who watch to take advantage of their
weakness. It behoves us therefore to look to ourselves on the _blind
side_, as the part that lies most exposed to an attack. And yet, when we
have done our best to prevent mischief, the very precaution itself serves
many times to contribute to our ruin. In short, the ways and workings of
Providence are unsearchable, and it is not in the power of human prudence
to obviate all the accidents of life. A Shepherd and a Young Wolf.

A Shepherd took a Wolf’s sucking Whelp, and trained it up with his Dogs.
The Whelp fed with them, grew up with them, and whensoever they went
out upon the chase of a Wolf, the Whelp would be sure to make one. It
fell out sometimes that the Wolf escaped; but this domestic Wolf would
be still hunting on, after the dogs had given over the chase, till he
came up to his true brethren, where he took part of the prey with them,
and then went back again to his master. And when he could come in for
no snacks with the Wolves, he would now and then make free, by the by,
with a straggling Sheep out of the flock. He carried on this trade for a
while; but at last he was caught in the fact, and hanged by his injured
master.     _Men naturally false and treacherous are no more to be    reclaimed than Wolves. Benefits but augment their power to    do mischief, and they never fail to make use of it to the    prejudice of their benefactors._  _The knave profest may seem a gen’rous foe,_  _Deserves a rope, yet claims our pity too;_  _But dragg’d to light, and stript of his disguise,_  _The sneaking hypocrite unpitied dies._ Ill dispositions may be dissembled for a while, but nature is very hardly
to be altered, either by counsel or education. It may do well enough
for curiosity and experiment, to try how far ill-natured men, and other
creatures, may be wrought upon by fair usage and good breeding; but the
inclination and cruelty of the dam will be hardly ever out of the Whelp.
_Thrust back nature with a pitch-fork_, says the poet, _and it will
return_. This Fable is a true portrait of an ungrateful and treacherous
mind, which, according to the proverb, _holds with the Hare, and runs
with the Hound_; which pretends greater zeal than others, like the Wolf’s
Whelp in the chase, in the detection and pursuit of a common enemy;
but at the same time divides spoils with him, and, rather than want an
opportunity of doing mischief, will prey privately upon the property he
pretends to defend. Many such instances we might give in public life;
and there have been too many such also in private life. The punishment
so richly merited in the Fable is heartily to be wished whenever they
happen, and it is a pity it should be wanted.

In a terrible tempest at Sea, one Seaman took notice that the rest of
his fellows were praying severally to so many Saints. Have a care, my
masters, says he, what you do; for what if we should all be drowned now
before the messenger can deliver his errand? would it not be better,
without going so far about, to pray to Him that can save us without help.     _A wise man will take the nearest and surest way to obtain his    end, and to commit no business of importance to a proxy, where    he may do it himself._  _Inactive wishes are but waste of time,_  _And, without efforts, pray’rs themselves a crime:_  _Vain are their hopes, who miracles expect,_  _And ask from heaven what themselves neglect._ Mankind, indolent and discontented, are very apt to murmur at the
dispensations of Providence, and to call for divine assistance to
extricate them from their difficulties, when it is in their own power to
accomplish what they desire. They, who will not stir a finger to promote
their own interest, have little title to expect any foreign assistance:
but when they have exerted their utmost skill and assiduity, their
prayers, if there is need for them, will be enforced by every argument
drawn from their own merit, and the compassion of those to whom they make
their application. Industry includes in itself this double blessing:
It commonly enables us to gain the point we aim at; and in that case
heightens the relish of our enjoyments, when we consider that we have
attained them by our own art and perseverance: but if we should happen
to fail in our endeavours, it excites the pity of those who are able to
serve us; and gives a grace to our petitions for assistance and relief.

What needs any man make his court to the servants, says Sir _Roger
L’Estrange_, when his access is open to the Master? and especially when
that Master is as ready to give as the petitioner to ask.

With regard to secular matters, we are told a pleasant story of one of
our princes, King _Charles_ II. He had often observed a country gentleman
attending to speak with one of his first ministers; and once passing
through the apartment where the gentleman happened to be alone, he asked
him his business. He told him, that he was attending upon his minister,
as he had often done, for such a post in his Majesty’s gift. The King
asked him, what he was to give for it to the minister? He said £1000. The
King humorously told him he should have it, and bid him give him £500,
and keep t’other £500 himself; and if he or his friends wanted any more
such bargains, he might apply to _himself_ directly, and be served at
half price.


A Fox taken in a trap was glad to compound for his neck, by leaving his
tail behind him. It was so uncouth a sight for a Fox to appear without
a tail, that the very thought of it made him weary of his life: but,
however, for the better countenance of the scandal, he got the _Master
and Wardens of the Foxes’ company_ to call a _Court of Assistants_, where
he himself appeared, and made a learned discourse upon the trouble, the
uselessness, and the indecency of Foxes wearing tails. He had no sooner
said out his say, but up rises a cunning Snap, then at the board, who
desired to be informed, whether the worthy member that moved against the
wearing of tails, gave his advice for the advantage of those that _had
tails_, or to palliate the deformity and disgrace of those that _had
none_.
    _It is the way of the world to give other people counsel for    by-ends. But yet it is a hard matter to over-rule a multitude    to their own pain and loss._  _Gladly Sir ~Clumsy~ would the world persuade,_  _Not he, but all mankind are vilely made;_  _And might the purblind and the deaf advise,_  _’Twere better for to want both ear and eyes._


We may improve a doctrine from this, that every man has his _weak side_,
either by mischance or by nature; and that he makes it his business to
cover it, too, the best he can. In case of the worst, it is some sort
of ease to have company in misfortune. It puts a man out of countenance
to be in fashion by himself, and therefore the Fox acted cunningly to
try if he could bring his fellow Foxes to put themselves into his mode.
When we have carried a point as far as it will go, and can make no more
of it, it is a stroke of art and philosophy to look as if we did not
so much as wish for a thing that is not to be had. Every man’s present
condition has somewhat to be said for it: if it be uneasy, the skill will
be, either how to _mend_ it, or how to _bear_ it; but then there must be
no clashing with the methods, the decrees, and the laws of nature. A man
that has forfeited his honour and his conscience, seems to be much in the
condition of the Fox here that had lost his tail; and oftentimes takes as
much pains, too, to persuade all his companions to follow his fashion,
and be as corrupt as himself, that he may bring the rest of the world
down to his own standard.

In respect to temporal affairs, they, who pretend to advise what measures
are most conducive to the public welfare, are often guided entirely by
their own private interest: but whenever they counsel any extraordinary
innovations, or endeavour to change any established proceedings long used
and approved, we may be almost certain that they have some other design,
rather than the promotion of the general good. When new regulations are
proposed, we should turn our eyes on those who propose them, and consider
with attention, whether they have not some personal motives for their
conduct, and we should be particularly cautious not to suffer ourselves
to be imposed on by _fine speeches_ and _pretended patriotism_: for _he_
who is _very solicitous_ to bring about a scheme, not attended with any
visible advantage to the community, must only mean his own benefit; or,
like the Fox, when he has been caught himself in one trap, endeavour to
catch us in another.

A Presumptuous Scoffer at things sacred took a journey to _Delphi_,
on purpose to try if he could put a trick upon _Apollo_. He carried a
sparrow in his hand under his coat, and told the god, _I have something
in my hand_, says he: _Is it dead or living?_ If the oracle should say it
was dead, he could show it alive; if living, it was but squeezing it, and
then it was dead. He that saw the iniquity of his heart, gave him this
answer: It shall e’en be which of the two thou pleasest: for it is in thy
choice to have it either the one or the other, as to the bird, but it is
not in thy power as to thyself; and immediately struck the bold scoffer
dead, for a warning to others.    _Presumption naturally leads people to infidelity, and that    by insensible degrees to atheism: for when men have once cast    off a reverence for religion, they are come within one step of    laughing at it._  _That there’s a God all nature loud proclaims,_  _Tho’ the vile Atheist the great truth disclaims;_  _Or warp’d by prejudice, or sunk in sin,_  _His fright’ned conscience feels the lash within._


There is no playing fast and loose with God Almighty, who sees the very
thoughts of our hearts. This way of fooling in holy things, is the very
boldest sort of impiety that can be practised. He that pretends to doubt
of an All-knowing power, has as much right to doubt of an Almighty power
too; and the bringing of one attribute in question, opens the way to a
diffidence of all the rest. It would prevent



The Project Gutenberg EBook of On the Margin, by Aldous Huxley

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: On the Margin
       Notes and Essays

Author: Aldous Huxley

Release Date: December 7, 2019 [EBook #60866]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ON THE MARGIN ***

From Bocca di Magra to Bocca d’Arno, mile after mile, the sandy beaches
smoothly, unbrokenly extend. Inland from the beach, behind a sheltering
belt of pines, lies a strip of coastal plain—flat as a slice of Holland
and dyked with slow streams. Corn grows here and the vine, with
plantations of slim poplars interspersed, and fat water-meadows. Here
and there the streams brim over into shallow lakes, whose shores are
fringed with sodden fields of rice. And behind this strip of plain, four
or five miles from the sea, the mountains rise, suddenly and steeply:
the Apuan Alps. Their highest crests are of bare limestone, streaked
here and there with the white marble which brings prosperity to the
little towns that stand at their feet: Massa and Carrara, Serravezza,
Pietrasanta. Half the world’s tombstones are scooped out of these noble
crags. Their lower slopes are grey with olive trees, green with woods of
chestnut. Over their summits repose the enormous sculptured masses of
the clouds.

              From cape to cape, with a bridge-like shape,
                Over a torrent sea,
              Sunbeam-proof, I hang like a roof,—
                The mountains its columns be.

The landscape fairly quotes Shelley at you. This sea with its luminous
calms and sudden tempests, these dim blue islands hull down on the
horizon, these mountains and their marvellous clouds, these rivers and
woodlands are the very substance of his poetry. Live on this coast for a
little and you will find yourself constantly thinking of that lovely,
that strangely childish poetry, that beautiful and child-like man.
Perhaps his spirit haunts the coast. It was in this sea that he sailed
his flimsy boat, steering with one hand and holding in the other his
little volume of Æschylus. You picture him so on the days of calm. And
on the days of sudden violent storm you think of him, too. The
lightnings cut across the sky, the thunders are like terrible explosions
overhead, the squall comes down with a fury. What news of the flimsy
boat? None, save only that a few days after the storm a young body is
washed ashore, battered, unrecognizable; the little Æschylus in the coat
pocket is all that tells us that this was Shelley.

I have been spending the summer on this haunted coast. That must be my
excuse for mentioning in so self-absorbed a world as is ours the name of
a poet who has been dead these hundred years. But be reassured. I have
no intention of writing an article about the ineffectual angel beating
in the void his something-or-other wings in vain. I do not mean to add
my croak to the mellifluous chorus of centenary-celebrators. No; the
ghost of Shelley, who walks in Versilia and the Lunigia, by the shores
of the Gulf of Spezia and below Pisa where Arno disembogues, this ghost
with whom I have shaken hands and talked, incites me, not to add a
supererogatory and impertinent encomium, but rather to protest against
the outpourings of the other encomiasts, of the honey-voiced
centenary-chanters.

The cooing of these persons, ordinarily a specific against insomnia, is
in this case an irritant; it rouses, it exacerbates. For annoying and
disgusting it certainly is, this spectacle of a rebellious youth praised
to fulsomeness, a hundred years after his death, by people who would
hate him and be horrified by him, if he were alive, as much as the
Scotch reviewers hated and were horrified by Shelley. How would these
persons treat a young contemporary who, not content with being a
literary innovator, should use his talent to assault religion and the
established order, should blaspheme against plutocracy and patriotism,
should proclaim himself a Bolshevik, an internationalist, a pacifist, a
conscientious objector? They would say of him that he was a dangerous
young man who ought to be put in his place; and they would either
disparage and denigrate his talent, or else—if they were a little more
subtly respectable—they would never allow his name to get into print in
any of the periodicals which they controlled. But seeing that Shelley
was safely burnt on the sands of Viareggio a hundred years ago, seeing
that he is no longer a live dangerous man but only a dead classic, these
respectable supporters of established literature and established society
join in chorus to praise him, and explain his meaning, and preach
sermons over him. The mellifluous cooing is accompanied by a snuffle,
and there hangs over these centenary celebrations a genial miasma of
hypocrisy and insincerity. The effect of these festal anniversaries in
England is not to rekindle life in the great dead; a centenary is rather
a second burial, a reaffirmation of deadness. A spirit that was once
alive is fossilized and, in the midst of solemn and funereal ceremonies,
the petrified classic is duly niched in the temple of respectability.

How much better they order these things in Italy! In that country—which
one must ever admire more the more one sees of it—they duly celebrate
their great men; but celebrate them not with a snuffle, not in black
clothes, not with prayer-books in their hands, crape round their hats
and a hatred, in their hearts, of all that has to do with life and
vigour. No, no; they make their dead an excuse for quickening life among
the living; they get fun out of their centenaries.

Last year the Italians were celebrating the six hundredth anniversary of
Dante’s death. Now, imagine what this celebration would have been like
in England. All the oldest critics and all the young men who aspire to
be old would have written long articles in all the literary papers. That
would have set the tone. After that some noble lord, or even a Prince of
the Blood, would have unveiled a monument designed by Frampton or some
other monumental mason of the Academy. Imbecile speeches in words of not
more than two syllables would then have been pronounced over the ashes
of the world’s most intelligent poet. To his intelligence no reference
would, of course, be made; but his character, ah! his character would
get a glowing press. The most fiery and bitter of men would be held up
as an example to all Sunday-school children.

After this display of reverence, we should have had a lovely historical
pageant in the rain. A young female dressed in white bunting would have
represented Beatrice, and for the Poet himself some actor manager with a
profile and a voice would have been found. Guelfs and Ghibellines in
fancy dress of the period would go splashing about in the mud, and a
great many verses by Louis Napoleon Parker would be declaimed. And at
the end we should all go home with colds in our heads and suffering from
septic ennui, but with, at the same time, a pleasant feeling of
virtuousness, as though we had been at church.

See now what happens in Italy. The principal event in the Dante
celebration is an enormous military review. Hundreds of thousands of
wiry little brown men parade the streets of Florence. Young officers of
a fabulous elegance clank along in superbly tailored riding breeches and
glittering top-boots. The whole female population palpitates. It is an
excellent beginning. Speeches are then made, as only in Italy they can
be made—round, rumbling, sonorous speeches, all about Dante the
Italianissimous poet, Dante the irredentist, Dante the prophet of
Greater Italy, Dante the scourge of Jugo-Slavs and Serbs. Immense
enthusiasm. Never having read a line of his works, we feel that Dante is
our personal friend, a brother Fascist.

After that the real fun begins; we have the _manifestazioni sportive_ of
the centenary celebrations. Innumerable bicycle races are organized.
Fierce young Fascisti with the faces of Roman heroes pay their homage to
the Poet by doing a hundred and eighty kilometres to the hour round the
Circuit of Milan. High speed Fiats and Ansaldos and Lancias race one
another across the Apennines and round the bastions of the Alps. Pigeons
are shot, horses gallop, football is played under the broiling sun. Long
live Dante!

How infinitely preferable this is to the stuffiness and the snuffle of
an English centenary! Poetry, after all, is life, not death. Bicycle
races may not have very much to do with Dante—though I can fancy him,
his thin face set like metal, whizzing down the spirals of Hell on a
pair of twinkling wheels or climbing laboriously the one-in-three
gradients of Purgatory Mountain on the back of his trusty Sunbeam. No,
they may not have much to do with Dante; but pageants in Anglican
cathedral closes, boring articles by old men who would hate and fear him
if he were alive, speeches by noble lords over monuments made by Royal
Academicians—these, surely, have even less to do with the author of the
_Inferno_.

It is not merely their great dead whom the Italians celebrate in this
gloriously living fashion. Even their religious festivals have the same
jovial warm-blooded character. This summer, for example, a great feast
took place at Loreto to celebrate the arrival of a new image of the
Virgin to replace the old one which was burnt some little while ago. The
excitement started in Rome, where the image, after being blessed by the
Pope, was taken in a motor-car to the station amid cheering crowds who
shouted, “Evviva Maria” as the Fiat and its sacred burden rolled past.
The arrival of the Virgin in Loreto was the signal for a tremendous
outburst of jollification. The usual bicycle races took place; there
were football matches and pigeon-shooting competitions and Olympic
games. The fun lasted for days. At the end of the festivities two
cardinals went up in aeroplanes and blessed the assembled multitudes—an
incident of which the Pope is said to have remarked that the blessing,
in this case, did indeed come from heaven.

Rare people! If only we Anglo-Saxons could borrow from the Italians some
of their realism, their love of life for its own sake, of palpable,
solid, immediate things. In this dim land of ours we are accustomed to
pay too much respect to fictitious values; we worship invisibilities and
in our enjoyment of immediate life we are restrained by imaginary
inhibitions. We think too much of the past, of metaphysics, of
tradition, of the ideal future, of decorum and good form; too little of
life and the glittering noisy moment. The Italians are born Futurists.
It did not need Marinetti to persuade them to celebrate Dante with
bicycle races; they would have done it naturally, spontaneously, if no
Futurist propaganda had ever been issued. Marinetti is the product of
modern Italy, not modern Italy of Marinetti. They are all Futurists in
that burningly living Italy where we from the North seek only an escape
into the past. Or rather, they are not Futurists: Marinetti’s label was
badly chosen. They are Presentists. The early Christians preoccupied
with nothing but the welfare of their souls in the life to come were
Futurists, if you like.

We shall do well to learn something of their lively Presentism. Let us
hope that our great-grandchildren will celebrate the next centenary of
Shelley’s death by aerial regattas and hydroplane races. The living will
be amused and the dead worthily commemorated. The spirit of the man who
delighted, during life, in wind and clouds, in mountain-tops and waters,
in the flight of birds and the gliding of ships, will be rejoiced when
young men celebrate his memory by flying through the air or skimming,
like alighting swans, over the surface of the sea.

           The rocks are cloven, and through the purple night
           I see cars drawn by rainbow-winged steeds
           Which trample the dim winds; in each there stands
           A wild-eyed charioteer urging their flight.
           Some look behind, as fiends pursued them there,
           And yet I see no shapes but the keen stars;
           Others, with burning eyes, lean forth, and drink
           With eager lips the wind of their own speed,
           As if the thing they loved fled on before,
           And now, even now, they clasped it.

The man who wrote this is surely more suitably celebrated by aeroplane
or even bicycle races than by seven-column articles from the pens of
Messrs.—well, perhaps we had better mention no names. Let us take a leaf
out of the Italian book.




                      II: ON RE-READING _CANDIDE_


The furniture vans had unloaded their freight in the new house. We were
installed, or, at least, we were left to make the best of an unbearable
life in the dirt and the confusion. One of the Pre-Raphaelites, I forget
at the moment which, once painted a picture called “The Last Day in the
Old Home.” A touching subject. But it would need a grimmer, harder brush
to depict the horrors of “The First Day in the New Home.” I had sat down
in despair among the tumbled movables when I noticed—with what a thrill
of pleased recognition—the top of a little leather-bound book protruding
from among a mass of bulkier volumes in an uncovered case. It was
_Candide_, my treasured little first edition of 1759, with its
discreetly ridiculous title-page, “_Candide ou L’Optimisme_, Traduit de
l’Allemand de Mr. le Docteur Ralph.”

Optimism—I had need of a little at the moment, and as Mr. le Docteur
Ralph is notoriously one of the preachers most capable of inspiring it,
I took up the volume and began to read: “Il y avait en Westphalie, dans
le Château de Mr. le Baron de Thunder-ten-tronckh....” I did not put
down the volume till I had reached the final: “Il faut cultiver notre
jardin.” I felt the wiser and the more cheerful for Doctor Ralph’s
ministrations.

But the remarkable thing about re-reading _Candide_ is not that the book
amuses one, not that it delights and astonishes with its brilliance;
that is only to be expected. No, it evokes a new and, for me at least,
an unanticipated emotion. In the good old days, before the Flood, the
history of Candide’s adventures seemed to us quiet, sheltered,
middle-class people only a delightful phantasy, or at best a
high-spirited exaggeration of conditions which we knew, vaguely and
theoretically, to exist, to have existed, a long way off in space and
time. But read the book to-day; you feel yourself entirely at home in
its pages. It is like reading a record of the facts and opinions of
1922; nothing was ever more applicable, more completely to the point.
The world in which we live is recognizably the world of Candide and
Cunégonde, of Martin and the Old Woman who was a Pope’s daughter and the
betrothed of the sovereign Prince of Massa-Carrara. The only difference
is that the horrors crowd rather more thickly on the world of 1922 than
they did on Candide’s world. The manœuvrings of Bulgare and Abare, the
intestine strife in Morocco, the earthquake and _auto-da-fé_ are but
pale poor things compared with the Great War, the Russian Famine, the
Black and Tans, the Fascisti, and all the other horrors of which we can
proudly boast. “Quand Sa Hautesse envoye un vaisseau en Egypte,”
remarked the Dervish, “s’embarrasse-t-elle si les souris qui sont dans
le vaisseau sont à leur aise ou non?” No; but there are moments when Sa
Hautesse, absent-mindedly no doubt, lets fall into the hold of the
vessel a few dozen of hungry cats; the present seems to be one of them.

Cats in the hold? There is nothing in that to be surprised at. The
wisdom of Martin and the Old Woman who was once betrothed to the Prince
of Massa-Carrara has become the everyday wisdom of all the world since
1914. In the happy Victorian and Edwardian past, Western Europe, like
Candide, was surprised at everything. It was amazed by the frightful
conduct of King Bomba, amazed by the Turks, amazed by the political
chicanery and loose morals of the Second Empire—(what is all Zola but a
prolonged exclamation of astonishment at the goings-on of his
contemporaries?). After that we were amazed at the disgusting behaviour
of the Boers, while the rest of Europe was amazed at ours. There
followed the widespread astonishment that in this, the so-called
twentieth century, black men should be treated as they were being
treated on the Congo and the Amazon. Then came the war: a great outburst
of indignant astonishment, and afterwards an acquiescence as complete,
as calmly cynical as Martin’s. For we have discovered, in the course of
the somewhat excessively prolonged _histoire à la Candide_ of the last
seven years, that astonishment is a supererogatory emotion. All things
are possible, not merely for Providence, whose ways we had always known,
albeit for some time rather theoretically, to be strange, but also for
men.

Men, we thought, had grown up from the brutal and rampageous
hobbledehoyism of earlier ages and were now as polite and genteel as
Gibbon himself. We now know better. Create a hobbledehoy environment and
you will have hobbledehoy behaviour; create a Gibbonish environment and
every one will be, more or less, genteel. It seems obvious, now. And now
that we are living in a hobbledehoy world, we have learnt Martin’s
lesson so well that we can look on almost unmoved at the most appalling
natural catastrophes and at exhibitions of human stupidity and
wickedness which would have aroused us in the past to surprise and
indignation. Indeed, we have left Martin behind and are become, with
regard to many things, Pococurante.

And what is the remedy? Mr. le Docteur Ralph would have us believe that
it consists in the patient cultivation of our gardens. He is probably
right. The only trouble is that the gardens of some of us seem hardly
worth cultivating. The garden of the bank clerk and the factory hand,
the shop-girl’s garden, the garden of the civil servant and the
politician—can one cultivate them with much enthusiasm? Or, again, there
is my garden, the garden of literary journalism. In this little plot I
dig and delve, plant, prune, and finally reap—sparsely enough, goodness
knows!—from one year’s end to another. And to what purpose, to whom for
a good, as the Latin Grammar would say? Ah, there you have me.

There is a passage in one of Tchekov’s letters which all literary
journalists should inscribe in letters of gold upon their writing desks.
“I send you,” says Tchekov to his correspondent, “Mihailovsky’s article
on Tolstoy.... It’s a good article, but it’s strange: one might write a
thousand such articles and things would not be one step forwarder, and
it would still remain unintelligible why such articles are written.”

_Il faut cultiver notre jardin._ Yes, but suppose one begins to wonder
why?




                              III: ACCIDIE


The cœnobites of the Thebaid were subjected to the assaults of many
demons. Most of these evil spirits came furtively with the coming of
night. But there was one, a fiend of deadly subtlety, who was not afraid
to walk by day. The holy men of the desert called him the _dæmon
meridianus_; for his favourite hour of visitation was in the heat of the
day. He would lie in wait for monks grown weary with working in the
oppressive heat, seizing a moment of weakness to force an entrance into
their hearts. And once installed there, what havoc he wrought! For
suddenly it would seem to the poor victim that the day was intolerably
long and life desolatingly empty. He would go to the door of his cell
and look up at the sun and ask himself if a new Joshua had arrested it
midway up the heavens. Then he would go back into the shade and wonder
what good he was doing in that cell or if there was any object in
existence. Then he would look at the sun again and find it indubitably
stationary, and the hour of the communal repast of the evening as remote
as ever. And he would go back to his meditations, to sink, sink through
disgust and lassitude into the black depths of despair and hopeless
unbelief. When that happened the demon smiled and took his departure,
conscious that he had done a good morning’s work.

Throughout the Middle Ages this demon was known as Acedia, or, in
English, Accidie. Monks were still his favourite victims, but he made
many conquests among the laity also. Along with _gastrimargia_,
_fornicatio_, _philargyria_, _tristitia_, _cenodoxia_, _ira_ and
_superbia_, _acedia_ or _tædium cordis_ is reckoned as one of the eight
principal vices to which man is subject. Inaccurate psychologists of
evil are wont to speak of accidie as though it were plain sloth. But
sloth is only one of the numerous manifestations of the subtle and
complicated vice of accidie. Chaucer’s discourse on it in the “Parson’s
Tale” contains a very precise description of this disastrous vice of the
spirit. “Accidie,” he tells us, “makith a man hevy, thoghtful and
wrawe.” It paralyzes human will, “it forsloweth and forsluggeth” a man
whenever he attempts to act. From accidie comes dread to begin to work
any good deeds, and finally wanhope, or despair. On its way to ultimate
wanhope, accidie produces a whole crop of minor sins, such as idleness,
tardiness, _lâchesse_, coldness, undevotion and “the synne of worldly
sorrow, such as is cleped _tristitia_, that sleth man, as seith seint
Poule.” Those who have sinned by accidie find their everlasting home in
the fifth circle of the Inferno. They are plunged in the same black bog
with the Wrathful, and their sobs and words come bubbling up to the
surface:

               Fitti nel limo dicon: “Tristi fummo
                 nell’ aer dolce che dal sol s’ allegra,
                 portando dentro accidioso fummo;

               Or ci attristiam nella belletta negra.”
                 Quest’ inno si gorgoglian nella strozza,
                 chè dir nol posson con parola integra.

Accidie did not disappear with the monasteries and the Middle Ages. The
Renaissance was also subject to it. We find a copious description of the
symptoms of acedia in Burton’s _Anatomy of Melancholy_. The results of
the midday demon’s machinations are now known as the vapours or the
spleen. To the spleen amiable Mr. Matthew Green, of the Custom House,
devoted those eight hundred octosyllables which are his claim to
immortality. For him it is a mere disease to be healed by temperate
diet:

                   Hail! water gruel, healing power,
                   Of easy access to the poor;

by laughter, reading and the company of unaffected young ladies:

                  Mothers, and guardian aunts, forbear
                  Your impious pains to form the fair,
                  Nor lay out so much cost and art
                  But to deflower the virgin heart;

by the avoidance of party passion, drink, Dissenters and missionaries,
especially missionaries: to whose undertakings Mr. Green always declined
to subscribe:

                  I laugh off spleen and keep my pence
                  From spoiling Indian innocence;

by refraining from going to law, writing poetry and thinking about one’s
future state.

_The Spleen_ was published in the thirties of the eighteenth century.
Accidie was still, if not a sin, at least a disease. But a change was at
hand. “The sin of worldly sorrow, such as is cleped _tristitia_,” became
a literary virtue, a spiritual mode. The apostles of melancholy wound
their faint horns, and the Men of Feeling wept. Then came the nineteenth
century and romanticism; and with them the triumph of the meridian
demon. Accidie in its most complicated and most deadly form, a mixture
of boredom, sorrow and despair, was now an inspiration to the greatest
poets and novelists, and it has remained so to this day. The Romantics
called this horrible phenomenon the _mal du siècle_. But the name made
no difference; the thing was still the same. The meridian demon had good
cause to be satisfied during the nineteenth century, for it was then, as
Baudelaire puts it, that

                L’Ennui, fruit de la morne incuriosité,
                Prit les proportions de l’immortalité.

It is a very curious phenomenon, this progress of accidie from the
position of being a deadly sin, deserving of damnation, to the position
first of a disease and finally of an essentially lyrical emotion,
fruitful in the inspiration of much of the most characteristic modern
literature. The sense of universal futility, the feelings of boredom and
despair, with the complementary desire to be “anywhere, anywhere out of
the world,” or at least out of the place in which one happens at the
moment to be, have been the inspiration of poetry and the novel for a
century and more. It would have been inconceivable in Matthew Green’s
day to have written a serious poem about ennui. By Baudelaire’s time
ennui was as suitable a subject for lyric poetry as love; and accidie is
still with us as an inspiration, one of the most serious and poignant of
literary themes. What is the significance of this fact? For clearly the
progress of accidie is a spiritual event of considerable importance. How
is it to be explained?

It is not as though the nineteenth century invented accidie. Boredom,
hopelessness and despair have always existed, and have been felt as
poignantly in the past as we feel them now. Something has happened to
make these emotions respectable and avowable; they are no longer sinful,
no longer regarded as the mere symptoms of disease. That something that
has happened is surely simply history since 1789. The failure of the
French Revolution and the more spectacular downfall of Napoleon planted
accidie in the heart of every youth of the Romantic generation—and not
in France alone, but all over Europe—who believed in liberty or whose
adolescence had been intoxicated by the ideas of glory and genius. Then
came industrial progress with its prodigious multiplication of filth,
misery, and ill-gotten wealth; the defilement of nature by modern
industry was in itself enough to sadden many sensitive minds. The
discovery that political enfranchisement, so long and stubbornly fought
for, was the merest futility and vanity so long as industrial servitude
remained in force was another of the century’s horrible
disillusionments.

A more subtle cause of the prevalence of boredom was the
disproportionate growth of the great towns. Habituated to the feverish
existence of these few centres of activity, men found that life outside
them was intolerably insipid. And at the same time they became so much
exhausted by the restlessness of city life that they pined for the
monotonous boredom of the provinces, for exotic islands, even for other
worlds—any haven of rest. And finally, to crown this vast structure of
failures and disillusionments, there came the appalling catastrophe of
the War of 1914. Other epochs have witnessed disasters, have had to
suffer disillusionment; but in no century have the disillusionments
followed on one another’s heels with such unintermitted rapidity as in
the twentieth, for the good reason that in no century has change been so
rapid and so profound. The _mal du siècle_ was an inevitable evil;
indeed, we can claim with a certain pride that we have a right to our
accidie. With us it is not a sin or a disease of the hypochondries; it
is a state of mind which fate has forced upon us.




                      IV: SUBJECT-MATTER OF POETRY


It should theoretically be possible to make poetry out of anything
whatsoever of which the spirit of man can take cognizance. We find,
however, as a matter of historical fact, that most of the world’s best
poetry has been content with a curiously narrow range of subject-matter.
The poets have claimed as their domain only a small province of our
universe. One of them now and then, more daring or better equipped than
the rest, sets out to extend the boundaries of the kingdom. But for the
most part the poets do not concern themselves with fresh conquests; they
prefer to consolidate their power at home, enjoying quietly their
hereditary possessions. All the world is potentially theirs, but they do
not take it. What is the reason for this, and why is it that poetical
practice does not conform to critical theory? The problem has a peculiar
relevance and importance in these days, when young poetry claims
absolute liberty to speak how it likes of whatsoever it pleases.

Wordsworth, whose literary criticism, dry and forbidding though its
aspect may be, is always illumined by a penetrating intelligence,
Wordsworth touched upon this problem in his preface to _Lyrical
Ballads_—touched on it and, as usual, had something of value to say
about it. He is speaking here of the most important and the most
interesting of the subjects which may, theoretically, be made into
poetry, but which have, as a matter of fact, rarely or never undergone
the transmutation: he is speaking of the relations between poetry and
that vast world of abstractions and ideas—science and philosophy—into
which so few poets have ever penetrated. “The remotest discoveries of
the chemist, the botanist, or mineralogist, will be as proper objects of
the poet’s art as any upon which he is now employed, if the time should
ever come when these things shall be familiar to us, and the relations
under which they are contemplated shall be manifestly and palpably
material to us as enjoying and suffering beings.” It is a formidable
sentence; but read it well, read the rest of the passage from which it
is taken, and you will find it to be full of critical truth.

The gist of Wordsworth’s argument is this. All subjects—“the remotest
discoveries of the chemist” are but one example of an unlikely poetic
theme—can serve the poet with material for his art, on one condition:
that he, and to a lesser degree his audience, shall be able to apprehend
the subject with a certain emotion. The subject must somehow be involved
in the poet’s intimate being before he can turn it into poetry. It is
not enough, for example, that he should apprehend it merely through his
senses. (The poetry of pure sensation, of sounds and bright colours, is
common enough nowadays; but amusing as we may find it for the moment, it
cannot hold the interest for long.) It is not enough, at the other end
of the scale, if he apprehends his subject in a purely intellectual
manner. An abstract idea must be felt with a kind of passion, it must
mean something emotionally significant, it must be as immediate and
important to the poet as a personal relationship before he can make
poetry of it. Poetry, in a word, must be written by “enjoying and
suffering beings,” not by beings exclusively dowered with sensations or,
as exclusively, with intellect.

Wordsworth’s criticism helps us to understand why so few subjects have
ever been made into poetry when everything under the sun, and beyond it,
is theoretically suitable for transmutation into a work of art. Death,
love, religion, nature; the primary emotions and the ultimate personal
mysteries—these form the subject-matter of most of the greatest poetry.
And for obvious reasons. These things are “manifestly and palpably
material to us as enjoying and suffering beings.” But to most men,
including the generality of poets, abstractions and ideas are not
immediately and passionately moving. They are not enjoying or suffering
when they apprehend these things—only thinking.

The men who do feel passionately about abstractions, the men to whom
ideas are as persons—moving and disquietingly alive—are very seldom
poets. They are men of science and philosophers, preoccupied with the
search for truth and not, like the poet, with the expression and
creation of beauty. It is very rarely that we find a poet who combines
the power and the desire to express himself with that passionate
apprehension of ideas and that passionate curiosity about strange remote
facts which characterize the man of science and the philosopher. If he
possessed the requisite sense of language and the impelling desire to
express himself in terms of beauty, Einstein could write the most
intoxicating lyrics about relativity and the pleasures of pure
mathematics. And if, say, Mr. Yeats understood the Einstein
theory—which, in company with most other living poets, he presumably
does not, any more than the rest of us—if he apprehended it exultingly
as something bold and profound, something vitally important and
marvellously true, he too could give us, out of the Celtic twilight, his
lyrics of relativity. It is those distressing little “ifs” that stand in
the way of this happy consummation. The conditions upon which any but
the most immediately and obviously moving subjects can be made into
poetry are so rarely fulfilled, the combination of poet and man of
science, poet and philosopher, is so uncommon, that the theoretical
universality of the art has only very occasionally been realized in
practice.

Contemporary poetry in the whole of the western world is insisting,
loudly and emphatically through the mouths of its propagandists, on an
absolute liberty to speak of what it likes how it likes. Nothing could
be better; all that we can now ask is that the poets should put the
theory into practice, and that they should make use of the liberty which
they claim by enlarging the bounds of poetry.

The propagandists would have us believe that the subject-matter of
contemporary poetry is new and startling, that modern poets are doing
something which has not been done before. “Most of the poets represented
in these pages,” writes Mr. Louis Untermeyer in his _Anthology of Modern
American Poetry_, “have found a fresh and vigorous material in a world
of honest and often harsh reality. They respond to the spirit of their
times; not only have their views changed, their vision has been widened
to include things unknown to the poets of yesterday. They have learned
to distinguish real beauty from mere prettiness, to wring loveliness out
of squalor, to find wonder in neglected places, to search for hidden
truths even in the dark caves of the unconscious.” Translated into
practice this means that contemporary poets can now write, in the words
of Mr. Sandburg, of the “harr and boom of the blast fires,” of “wops and
bohunks.” It means, in fact, that they are at liberty to do what Homer
did—to write freely about the immediately moving facts of everyday life.
Where Homer wrote of horses and the tamers of horses, our contemporaries
write of trains, automobiles, and the various species of wops and
bohunks who control the horsepower. That is all. Much too much stress
has been laid on the newness of the new poetry; its newness is simply a
return from the jewelled exquisiteness of the eighteen-nineties to the
facts and feelings of ordinary life. There is nothing intrinsically
novel or surprising in the introduction into poetry of machinery and
industrialism, of labour unrest and modern psychology: these things
belong to us, they affect us daily as enjoying and suffering beings;
they are a part of our lives, just as the kings, the warriors, the
horses and chariots, the picturesque mythology were part of Homer’s
life. The subject-matter of the new poetry remains the same as that of
the old. The old boundaries have not been extended. There would be real
novelty in the new poetry if it had, for example, taken to itself any of
the new ideas and astonishing facts with which the new science has
endowed the modern world. There would be real novelty in it if it had
worked out a satisfactory artistic method for dealing with abstractions.
It has not. Which simply means that that rare phenomenon, the poet in
whose mind ideas are a passion and a personal moving force, does not
happen to have appeared.

And how rarely in all the long past he has appeared! There was
Lucretius, the greatest of all the philosophic and scientific poets. In
him the passionate apprehension of ideas, and the desire and ability to
give them expression, combined to produce that strange and beautiful
epic of thought which is without parallel in the whole history of
literature. There was Dante, in whose soul the mediæval Christian
philosophy was a force that shaped and directed every feeling, thought
and action. There was Goethe, who focussed into beautiful expression an
enormous diffusion of knowledge and ideas. And there the list of the
great poets of thought comes to an end. In their task of extending the
boundaries of poetry into the remote and abstract world of ideas, they
have had a few lesser assistants—Donne, for example, a poet only just
less than the greatest; Fulke Greville, that strange, dark-spirited
Elizabethan; John Davidson, who made a kind of poetry out of Darwinism;
and, most interesting poetical interpreter of nineteenth-century
science, Jules Laforgue.

Which of our contemporaries can claim to have extended the bounds of
poetry to any material extent? It is not enough to have written about
locomotives and telephones, “wops and bohunks,” and all the rest of it.
That is not extending the range of poetry; it is merely asserting its
right to deal with the immediate facts of contemporary life, as Homer
and as Chaucer did. The critics who would have us believe that there is
something essentially unpoetical about a bohunk (whatever a Bohunk may
be), and something essentially poetical about Sir Lancelot of the Lake,
are, of course, simply negligible; they may be dismissed as
contemptuously as we have dismissed the pseudo-classical critics who
opposed the freedoms of the Romantic Revival. And the critics who think
it very new and splendid to bring bohunks into poetry are equally
old-fashioned in their ideas.

It will not be unprofitable to compare the literary situation in this
early twentieth century of ours with the literary situation of the early
seventeenth century. In both epochs we see a reaction against a rich and
somewhat formalized poetical tradition expressing itself in a
determination to extend the range of subject-matter, to get back to real
life, and to use more natural forms of expression. The difference
between the two epochs lies in the fact that the twentieth-century
revolution has been the product of a number of minor poets, none of them
quite powerful enough to achieve what he theoretically meant to do,
while the seventeenth-century revolution was the work of a single poet
of genius, John Donne. Donne substituted for the rich formalism of
non-dramatic Elizabethan poetry a completely realized new style, the
style of the so-called metaphysical poetry of the seventeenth century.
He was a poet-philosopher-man-of-action whose passionate curiosity about
facts enabled him to make poetry out of the most unlikely aspects of
material life, and whose passionate apprehension of ideas enabled him to
extend the bounds of poetry beyond the frontiers of common life and its
emotions into the void of intellectual abstraction. He put the whole
life and the whole mind of his age into poetry.

We to-day are metaphysicals without our Donne. Theoretically we are free
to make poetry of everything in the universe; in practice we are kept
within the old limits, for the simple reason that no great man has
appeared to show us how we can use our freedom. A certain amount of the
life of the twentieth century is to be found in our poetry, but precious
little of its mind. We have no poet to-day like that strange old Dean of
St. Paul’s three hundred years ago—no poet who can skip from the heights
of scholastic philosophy to the heights of carnal passion, from the
contemplation of divinity to the contemplation of a flea, from the rapt
examination of self to an enumeration of the most remote external facts
of science, and make all, by his strangely passionate apprehension, into
an intensely lyrical poetry.

The few poets who do try to make of contemporary ideas the substance of
their poetry, do it in a manner which brings little conviction or
satisfaction to the reader. There is Mr. Noyes, who is writing four
volumes of verse about the human side of science—in his case, alas, all
too human. Then there is Mr. Conrad Aiken. He perhaps is the most
successful exponent in poetry of contemporary ideas. In his case, it is
clear, “the remotest discoveries of the chemist” are apprehended with a
certain passion; all his emotions are tinged by his ideas. The trouble
with Mr. Aiken is that his emotions are apt to degenerate into a kind of
intellectual sentimentality, which expresses itself only too easily in
his prodigiously fluent, highly coloured verse.

One could lengthen the list of more or less interesting poets who have
tried in recent times to extend the boundaries of their art. But one
would not find among them a single poet of real importance, not one
great or outstanding personality. The twentieth century still awaits its
Lucretius, awaits its own philosophical Dante, its new Goethe, its
Donne, even its up-to-date Laforgue. Will they appear? Or are we to go
on producing a poetry in which there is no more than the dimmest
reflection of that busy and incessant intellectual life which is the
characteristic and distinguishing mark of this age?




                             V: WATER MUSIC


The house in which I live is haunted by the noise of dripping water.
Always, day and night, summer and winter, something is dripping
somewhere. For many months an unquiet cistern kept up within its iron
bosom a long, hollow-toned soliloquy. Now it is mute; but a new and more
formidable drip has come into existence. From the very summit of the
house a little spout—the overflow, no doubt, of some unknown receptacle
under the roof—lets fall a succession of drops that is almost a
continuous stream. Down it falls, this all but stream, a sheer forty or
fifty feet on to the stones of the basement steps, thence to dribble
ignominiously away into some appointed drain. The cataracts blow their
trumpets from the steep; but my lesser waterfalls play a subtler, I had
almost said a more “modern” music. Lying awake at nights, I listen with
a mixture of pleasure and irritation to its curious cadences.

The musical range of a dripping tap is about half an octave. But within
the bounds of this major fourth, drops can play the most surprising and
varied melodies. You will hear them climbing laboriously up small
degrees of sound, only to descend at a single leap to the bottom. More
often they wander unaccountably about in varying intervals, familiar or
disconcertingly odd. And with the varying pitch the time also varies,
but within narrower limits. For the laws of hydrostatics, or whatever
other science claims authority over drops, do not allow the dribblings
much licence either to pause or to quicken the pace of their falling. It
is an odd sort of music. One listens to it as one lies in bed, slipping
gradually into sleep, with a curious, uneasy emotion.

Drip drop, drip drap drep drop. So it goes on, this watery melody, for
ever without an end. Inconclusive, inconsequent, formless, it is always
on the point of deviating into sense and form. Every now and then you
will hear a complete phrase of rounded melody. And then—drip drop,
di-drep, di-drap—the old inconsequence sets in once more. But suppose
there were some significance in it! It is that which troubles my drowsy
mind as I listen at night. Perhaps for those who have ears to hear, this
endless dribbling is as pregnant with thought and emotion, as
significant as a piece of Bach. Drip drop, di-drap, di-drep. So little
would suffice to turn the incoherence into meaning. The music of the
drops is the symbol and type of the whole universe; it is for ever, as
it were, asymptotic to sense, infinitely close to significance, but
never touching it. Never, unless the human mind comes and pulls it
forcibly over the dividing space. If I could understand this wandering
music, if I could detect in it a sequence, if I could force it to some
conclusion—the diapason closing full in God, in mind, I hardly care
what, so long as it closes in something definite—then, I feel, I should
understand the whole incomprehensible machine, from the gaps between the
stars to the policy of the Allies. And growing drowsier and drowsier, I
listen to the ceaseless tune, the hollow soliloquy in the cistern, the
sharp metallic rapping of the drops that fall from the roof upon the
stones below; and surely I begin to discover a meaning, surely I detect
a trace of thought, surely the phrases follow one another with art,
leading on inevitably to some prodigious conclusion. Almost I have it,
almost, almost.... Then, I suppose, I fall definitely to sleep. For the
next thing I am aware of is that the sunlight is streaming in. It is
morning, and the water is still dripping as irritatingly and
persistently as ever.

Sometimes the incoherence of the drop music is too much to be borne. The
listener insists that the asymptote shall somehow touch the line of
sense. He forces the drops to say something. He demands of them that
they shall play, shall we say, “God Save the King,” or the Hymn to Joy
from the Ninth Symphony, or _Voi che Sapete_. The drops obey
reluctantly; they play what you desire, but with more than the
ineptitude of the child at the piano. Still they play it somehow. But
this is an extremely dangerous method of laying the haunting ghost whose
voice is the drip of water. For once you have given the drops something
to sing or say, they will go on singing and saying it for ever. Sleep
becomes impossible, and at the two or three hundredth repetition of
_Madelon_ or even of an air from _Figaro_ the mind begins to totter
towards insanity.

Drops, ticking clocks, machinery, everything that throbs or clicks or
hums or hammers, can be made, with a little perseverance, to say
something. In my childhood, I remember, I was told that trains said, “To
Lancashire, to Lancashire, to fetch a pocket handkercher”—and _da capo_
ad infinitum. They can also repeat, if desired, that useful piece of
information: “To stop the train, pull down the chain.” But it is very
hard to persuade them to add the menacing corollary: “Penalty for
improper use Five Pounds.” Still, with careful tutoring I have succeeded
in teaching a train to repeat even that unrhythmical phrase.

Dadaist literature always reminds me a little of my falling drops.
Confronted by it, I feel the same uncomfortable emotion as is begotten
in me by the inconsequent music of water. Suppose, after all, that this
apparently accidental sequence of words should contain the secret of art
and life and the universe! It may; who knows? And here am I, left out in
the cold of total incomprehension; and I pore over this literature and
regard it upside down in the hope of discovering that secret. But
somehow I cannot induce the words to take on any meaning whatever. Drip
drop, di-drap, di-drep—Tzara and Picabia let fall their words and I am
baffled. But I can see that there are great possibilities in this type
of literature. For the tired journalist it is ideal, since it is not he,
but the reader who has to do all the work. All he need do is to lean
back in his chair and allow the words to dribble out through the nozzle
of his fountain pen. Drip, drop....




                             VI: PLEASURES


We have heard a great deal, since 1914, about the things which are a
menace to civilization. First it was Prussian militarism; then the
Germans at large; then the prolongation of the war; then the shortening
of the same; then, after a time, the Treaty of Versailles; then French
militarism—with, all the while, a running accompaniment of such minor
menaces as Prohibition, Lord Northcliffe, Mr. Bryan, Comstockery....

Civilization, however, has resisted the combined attacks of these
enemies wonderfully well. For still, in 1923, it stands not so very far
from where it stood in that “giant age before the flood” of nine years
since. Where, in relation to Neanderthal on the one hand and Athens on
the other, where precisely it stood _then_ is a question which each may
answer according to his taste. The important fact is that these menaces
to our civilization, such as it is—menaces including the largest war and
the stupidest peace known to history—have confined themselves in most
places and up till now to mere threats, barking more furiously than they
bite.

No, the dangers which confront our civilization are not so much the
external dangers—wild men, wars and the bankruptcy that wars bring after
them. The most alarming dangers are those which menace it from within,
that threaten the mind rather than the body and estate of contemporary
man.

Of all the various poisons which modern civilization, by a process of
auto-intoxication, brews quietly up within its own bowels, few, it seems
to me, are more deadly (while none appears more harmless) than that
curious and appalling thing that is technically known as “pleasure.”
“Pleasure” (I place the word between inverted commas to show that I
mean, not real pleasure, but the organized activities officially known
by the same name) “pleasure”—what nightmare visions the word evokes!
Like every man of sense and good feeling, I abominate work. But I would
rather put in eight hours a day at a Government office than be condemned
to lead a life of “pleasure”; I would even, I believe, prefer to write a
million words of journalism a year.

The horrors of modern “pleasure” arise from the fact that every kind of
organized distraction tends to become progressively more and more
imbecile. There was a time when people indulged themselves with
distractions requiring the expense of a certain intellectual effort. In
the seventeenth century, for example, royal personages and their
courtiers took a real delight in listening to erudite sermons (Dr.
Donne’s, for example) and academical disputes on points of theology or
metaphysics. Part of the entertainment offered to the Prince Palatine,
on the occasion of his marriage with James 1.’s daughter, was a
syllogistic argumentation, on I forget what philosophical theme, between
the amiable Lord Keeper Williams and a troop of minor Cambridge
logicians. Imagine the feelings of a contemporary prince, if a loyal
University were to offer him a similar entertainment!

Royal personages were not the only people who enjoyed intelligent
pleasures. In Elizabethan times every lady and gentleman of ordinary
culture could be relied upon, at demand, to take his or her part in a
madrigal or a motet. Those who know the enormous complexity and subtlety
of sixteenth-century music will realize what this means. To indulge in
their favourite pastime our ancestors had to exert their minds to an
uncommon degree. Even the uneducated vulgar delighted in pleasures
requiring the exercise of a certain intelligence, individuality and
personal initiative. They listened, for example, to _Othello_, _King
Lear_, and _Hamlet_—apparently with enjoyment and comprehension. They
sang and made much music. And far away, in the remote country, the
peasants, year by year, went through the traditional rites—the dances of
spring and summer, the winter mummings, the ceremonies of harvest
home—appropriate to each successive season. Their pleasures were
intelligent and alive, and it was they who, by their own efforts,
entertained themselves.

We have changed all that. In place of the old pleasures demanding
intelligence and personal initiative, we have vast organizations that
provide us with ready-made distractions—distractions which demand from
pleasure-seekers no personal participation and no intellectual effort of
any sort. To the interminable democracies of the world a million cinemas
bring the same stale balderdash. There have always been fourth-rate
writers and dramatists; but their works, in the past, quickly died
without getting beyond the boundaries of the city or the country in
which they appeared. To-day, the inventions of the scenario-writer go
out from Los Angeles across the whole world. Countless audiences soak
passively in the tepid bath of nonsense. No mental effort is demanded of
them, no participation; they need only sit and keep their eyes open.

Do the democracies want music? In the old days they would have made it
themselves. Now, they merely turn on the gramophone. Or if they are a
little more up-to-date they adjust their wireless telephone to the right
wave-length and listen-in to the fruity contralto at Marconi House,
singing “The Gleaner’s Slumber Song.”

And if they want literature, there is the Press. Nominally, it is true,
the Press exists to impart information. But its real function is to
provide, like the cinema, a distraction which shall occupy the mind
without demanding of it the slightest effort or the fatigue of a single
thought. This function, it must be admitted, it fulfils with an
extraordinary success. It is possible to go on for years and years,
reading two papers every working day and one on Sundays without ever
once being called upon to think or to make any other effort than to move
the eyes, not very attentively, down the printed column.

Certain sections of the community still practise athletic sports in
which individual participation is demanded. Great numbers of the middle
and upper classes play golf and tennis in person and, if they are
sufficiently rich, shoot birds and pursue the fox and go ski-ing in the
Alps. But the vast mass of the community has now come even to sport
vicariously, preferring the watching of football to the fatigues and
dangers of the actual game. All classes, it is true, still dance; but
dance, all the world over, the same steps to the same tunes. The dance
has been scrupulously sterilized of any local or personal individuality.

These effortless pleasures, these ready-made distractions that are the
same for every one over the face of the whole Western world, are surely
a worse menace to our civilization than ever the Germans were. The
working hours of the day are already, for the great majority of human
beings, occupied in the performance of purely mechanical tasks in which
no mental effort, no individuality, no initiative are required. And now,
in the hours of leisure, we turn to distractions as mechanically
stereotyped and demanding as little intelligence and initiative as does
our work. Add such leisure to such work and the sum is a perfect day
which it is a blessed relief to come to the end of.

Self-poisoned in this fashion, civilization looks as though it might
easily decline into a kind of premature senility. With a mind almost
atrophied by lack of use, unable to entertain itself and grown so
wearily uninterested in the ready-made distractions offered from without
that nothing but the grossest stimulants of an ever-increasing violence
and crudity can move it, the democracy of the future will sicken of a
chronic and mortal boredom. It will go, perhaps, the way the Romans
went: the Romans who came at last to lose, precisely as we are doing
now, the capacity to distract themselves; the Romans who, like us, lived
on ready-made entertainments in which they had no participation. Their
deadly ennui demanded ever more gladiators, more tightrope-walking
elephants, more rare and far-fetched animals to be slaughtered. Ours
would demand no less; but owing to the existence of a few idealists,
doesn’t get all it asks for. The most violent forms of entertainment can
only be obtained illicitly; to satisfy a taste for slaughter and cruelty
you must become a member of the Ku Klux Klan. Let us not despair,
however; we may still live to see blood flowing across the stage of the
Hippodrome. The force of a boredom clamouring to be alleviated may yet
prove too much for the idealists.




                        VII: MODERN FOLK POETRY


To all those who are interested in the “folk” and their poetry—the
contemporary folk of the great cities and their urban muse—I would
recommend a little-known journal called _McGlennon’s Pantomime Annual_.
This periodical makes its appearance at some time in the New Year, when
the pantos are slowly withering away under the influence of approaching
spring. I take this opportunity of warning my readers to keep a sharp
look out for the coming of the next issue; it is sure to be worth the
modest twopence which one is asked to pay for it.

_McGlennon’s Pantomime Annual_ is an anthology of the lyrics of the
panto season’s most popular songs. It is a document of first-class
importance. To the future student of our popular literature _McGlennon_
will be as precious as the Christie-Miller collection of Elizabethan
broadsheets. In the year 2220 a copy of the _Pantomime Annual_ may very
likely sell for hundreds of pounds at the Sotheby’s of the time. With
laudable forethought I am preserving my copy of last year’s _McGlennon_
for the enrichment of my distant posterity.

The Folk Poetry of 1920 may best be classified according to
subject-matter. First, by reason of its tender associations as well as
its mere amount, is the poetry of Passion. Then there is the Poetry of
Filial Devotion. Next, the Poetry of the Home—the dear old earthly Home
in Oregon or Kentucky—and, complementary to it, the Poetry of the
Spiritual Home in other and happier worlds. Here, as well as in the next
section, the popular lyric borrows some of its best effects from
hymnology. There follows the Poetry of Recollection and Regret, and the
Poetry of Nationality, a type devoted almost exclusively to the praises
of Ireland. These types and their variations cover the Folk’s serious
poetry. Their comic vein is less susceptible to analysis. Drink, Wives,
Young Nuts, Honeymoon Couples—these are a few of the stock subjects.

The Amorous Poetry of the Folk, like the love lyrics of more cultured
poets, is divided into two species: the Poetry of Spiritual Amour and
the more direct and concrete expression of Immediate Desire. _McGlennon_
provides plenty of examples of both types:

              When love peeps in the window of your heart

[it might be the first line of a Shakespeare sonnet]

                  You seem to walk on air,
                  Birds sing their sweet songs to you,
                  No cloud in your skies of blue,
                  Sunshine all the happy day, etc.

These rhapsodies tend to become a little tedious. But one feels the warm
touch of reality in

                 I want to snuggle, I want to snuggle,
                 I know a cosy place for two.
                 I want to snuggle, I want to snuggle,
                 I want to feel that love is true.
                 Take me in your arms as lovers do.
                 Hold me very tight and kiss me too.
                 I want to snuggle, I want to snuggle,
                 I want to snuggle close to you.

This is sound; but it does not come up to the best of the popular
lyrics. The agonized passion expressed in the words and music of “You
Made Me Love You” is something one does not easily forget, though that
great song is as old as the now distant origins of ragtime.

The Poetry of Filial Devotion is almost as extensive as the Poetry of
Amour. _McGlennon_ teems with such outbursts as this:

          You are a wonderful mother, dear old mother of mine.
          You’ll hold a spot down deep in my heart
          Till the stars no longer shine.
          Your soul shall live on for ever,
          On through the fields of time,
          For there’ll never be another to me
          Like that wonderful mother of mine.

Even Grandmamma gets a share of this devotion:

             Granny, my own, I seem to hear you calling me;
             Granny, my own, you are my sweetest memory ...
             If up in heaven angels reign supreme,
             Among the angels you must be the Queen.
             Granny, my own, I miss you more and more.

The last lines are particularly rich. What a fascinating heresy, to hold
that the angels reign over their Creator!

The Poetry of Recollection and Regret owes most, both in words and
music, to the hymn. _McGlennon_ provides a choice example in “Back from
the Land of Yesterday”:

              Back from the land of yesterday,
                Back to the friends of yore;
              Back through the dark and dreary way
                Into the light once more.
              Back to the heart that waits for me,
                Warmed by the sunshine above;
              Back from the old land of yesterday’s dreams
                To a new land of life and love.

What it means, goodness only knows. But one can imagine that, sunk to a
slow music in three-four time—some rich religious waltz-tune—it would be
extremely uplifting and edifying. The decay of regular churchgoing has
inevitably led to this invasion of the music-hall by the hymn. People
still want to feel the good uplifting emotion, and they feel it with a
vengeance when they listen to songs about

                         the land of beginning again,
                   Where skies are always blue ...
                   Where broken dreams come true.

The great advantage of the music-hall over the church is that the
uplifting moments do not last too long.

Finally, there is the great Home motif. “I want to be,” these lyrics
always begin, “I want to be almost anywhere that is not the place where
I happen at the moment to be.” M. Louis Estève has called this longing
“Le Mal de la Province,” which in its turn is closely related to “Le Mal
de l’au-delà.” It is one of the worst symptoms of romanticism.

                 Steamer, balançant ta mâture,
                 Lève l’ancre vers une exotique nature,

exclaims Mallarmé, and the Folk, whom that most exquisite of poets
loathed and despised, echo his words in a hundred different keys. There
is not a State in America where they don’t want to go. In _McGlennon_ we
find yearnings expressed for California, Ohio, Tennessee, Virginia, and
Georgia. Some sigh for Ireland, Devon, and the East. “Egypt! I am
calling you; oh, life is sweet and joys complete when at your feet I lay
[_sic_].” But the Southern States, the East, Devon, and Killarney are
not enough. The Mal de l’au-delà succeeds the Mal de la Province. The
Folk yearn for extra-mundane worlds. Here, for example, is an expression
of nostalgia for a mystical “Kingdom within your Eyes”:

                Somewhere in somebody’s eyes
                  Is a place just divine,
                Bounded by roses that kiss the dew
                  In those dear eyes that shine.
                Somewhere beyond earthly dreams,
                  Where love’s flower never dies,
                God made the world, and He gave it to me
                  In that kingdom within your eyes.

If there is any characteristic which distinguishes contemporary folk
poetry from the folk poetry of other times it is surely its
meaninglessness. Old folk poetry is singularly direct and to the point,
full of pregnant meaning, never vague. Modern folk poetry, as
exemplified in _McGlennon_, is almost perfectly senseless. The
Elizabethan peasant or mechanic would never have consented to sing or
listen to anything so flatulently meaningless as “Back from the Land of
Yesterday” or “The Kingdom within your Eyes.” His taste was for
something clear, definite and pregnant, like “Greensleeves”:

                  And every morning when you rose,
                    I brought you dainties orderly,
                  To clear your stomach from all woes—
                    And yet you would not love me.

Could anything be more logical and to the point? But we, instead of
logic, instead of clarity, are provided by our professional entertainers
with the drivelling imbecility of “Granny, my own.” Can it be that the
standard of intelligence is lower now than it was three hundred years
ago? Have newspapers and cinemas and now the wireless telephone
conspired to rob mankind of whatever sense of reality, whatever power of
individual questioning and criticism he once possessed? I do not venture
to answer. But the fact of _McGlennon_ has somehow got to be explained.
How? I prefer to leave the problem on a note of interrogation.




                           VIII: BIBLIOPHILY


Bibliophily is on the increase. It is a constatation which I make with
regret; for the bibliophile’s point of view is, to me at least,
unsympathetic and his standard of values unsound. Among the French,
bibliophily would seem to have become a kind of mania, and, what is
more, a highly organized and thoroughly exploited mania. Whenever I get
a new French book I turn at once—for in what disgusts and irritates one
there is always a certain odious fascination—to the fly-leaf. One had
always been accustomed to finding there a brief description of the
“vingt exemplaires sur papier hollande Van Gelder”; nobody objected to
the modest old Dutchman whose paper gave to the author’s presentation
copies so handsome an appearance. But Van Gelder is now a back number.
In this third decade of the twentieth century he has become altogether
too simple and unsophisticated. On the fly-leaf of a _dernière
nouveauté_ I find the following incantation, printed in block capitals
and occupying at least twenty lines:

  Il a été tiré de cet ouvrage, après impositions spéciales, 133
  exemplaires in-4. Tellière sur papier-vergé pur-fil Lafuma-Navarre, au
  filigrane de la _Nouvelle Revue Française_, dont 18 exemplaires hors
  commerce, marqués de A à R, 100 exemplaires réservés aux Bibliophiles
  de la _Nouvelle Revue Française_, numérotés de I à C, 15 exemplaires
  numérotés de CI à CXV; 1040 exemplaires sur papier vélin pur-fil
  Lafuma-Navarre, dont dix exemplaires hors commerce marqués de a à j,
  800 exemplaires réservés aux amis de l’Edition originale, numérotés de
  1 à 800, 30 exemplaires d’auteur, hors commerce, numérotés de 801 à
  830 et 200 exemplaires numérotés de 831 à 1030, ce tirage constituant
  proprement et authentiquement l’Edition originale.

If I were one of the hundred Bibliophiles of the _Nouvelle Revue
Française_ or even one of the eight hundred Friends of the Original
Edition, I should suggest, with the utmost politeness, that the
publishers might deserve better of their fellow-beings if they spent
less pains on numbering the first edition and more on seeing that it was
properly produced. Personally, I am the friend of any edition which is
reasonably well printed and bound, reasonably correct in the text and
reasonably clean. The consciousness that I possess a numbered copy of an
edition printed on Lafuma-Navarre paper, duly watermarked with the
publisher’s initials, does not make up for the fact that the book is
full of gross printer’s errors and that a whole sheet of sixteen pages
has wandered, during the process of binding, from one end of the volume
to the other—occurrences which are quite unnecessarily frequent in the
history of French book production.

With the increased attention paid to bibliophilous niceties, has come a
great increase in price. Limited _éditions de luxe_ have become absurdly
common in France, and there are dozens of small publishing concerns
which produce almost nothing else. Authors like Monsieur André Salmon
and Monsieur Max Jacob scarcely ever appear at less than twenty francs a
volume. Even with the exchange this is a formidable price; and yet the
French bibliophiles, for whom twenty francs are really twenty francs,
appear to have an insatiable appetite for these small and beautiful
editions. The War has established a new economic law: the poorer one
becomes the more one can afford to spend on luxuries.

The ordinary English publisher has never gone in for Van Gelder,
Lafuma-Navarre and numbered editions. Reticent about figures, he leaves
the book collector to estimate the first edition’s future rarity by
guesswork. He creates no artificial scarcity values. The collector of
contemporary English first editions is wholly a speculator; he never
knows what time may have in store.

In the picture trade for years past nobody has pretended that there was
any particular relation between the price of a picture and its value as
a work of art. A magnificent El Greco is bought for about a tenth of the
sum paid for a Romney that would be condemned by any self-respecting
hanging-committee. We are so well used to this sort of thing in picture
dealing that we have almost ceased to comment on it. But in the book
trade the tendency to create huge artificial values is of a later
growth. The spectacle of a single book being bought for fifteen thousand
pounds is still sufficiently novel to arouse indignation. Moreover, the
book collector who pays vast sums for his treasures has even less excuse
than has the collector of pictures. The value of an old book is wholly a
scarcity value. From a picture one may get a genuine æsthetic pleasure;
in buying a picture one buys the unique right to feel that pleasure. But
nobody can pretend that _Venus and Adonis_ is more delightful when it is
read in a fifteen thousand pound unique copy than when it is read in a
volume that has cost a shilling. On the whole, the printing and general
appearance of the shilling book is likely to be the better of the two.
The purchaser of the fabulously expensive old book is satisfying only
his possessive instinct. The buyer of a picture may also have a genuine
feeling for beauty.

The triumph and the _reductio ad absurdum_ of bibliophily were witnessed
not long ago at Sotheby’s, when the late Mr. Smith of New York bought
eighty thousand pounds’ worth of books in something under two hours at
the Britwell Court sale. The War, it is said, created forty thousand new
millionaires in America; the New York bookseller can have had no lack of
potential clients. He bought a thousand guinea volume as an ordinary
human being might buy something off the sixpenny shelf in a second-hand
shop. I have seldom witnessed a spectacle which inspired in me an
intenser blast of moral indignation. Moral indignation, of course, is
always to be mistrusted as, wholly or in part, the disguised
manifestation of some ignoble passion. In this case the basic cause of
my indignation was clearly envy. But there was, I flatter myself, a
superstructure of disinterested moral feeling. To debase a book into an
expensive object of luxury is as surely, in Miltonic language, “to kill
the image of God, as it were in the eye” as to burn it. And when one
thinks how those eighty thousand pounds might have been spent.... Ah,
well!




                           IX: DEMOCRATIC ART


There is intoxication to be found in a crowd. For it is good to be one
of many all doing the same thing—good whatever the thing may be, whether
singing hymns, watching a football match, or applauding the eternal
truths of politicians. Anything will serve as an excuse. It matters not
in whose name your two or three thousand are gathered together; what is
important is the process of gathering. In these last days we have
witnessed a most illuminating example of this tendency in the wild
outburst of mob excitement over the arrival in this country of Mary
Pickford. It is not as though people were really very much interested in
the Little Sweetheart of the World. She is no more than an excuse for
assembling in a crowd and working up a powerful communal emotion. The
newspapers set the excitement going; they built the fire, applied the
match, and cherished the infant flame. The crowds, only too happy to be
kindled, did the rest; they burned.

I belong to that class of unhappy people who are not easily infected by
crowd excitement. Too often I find myself sadly and coldly unmoved in
the midst of multitudinous emotion. Few sensations are more
disagreeable. The defect is in part temperamental, and in part is due to
that intellectual snobbishness, that fastidious rejection of what is
easy and obvious, which is one of the melancholy consequences of the
acquisition of culture. How often one regrets this asceticism of the
mind! How wistfully sometimes one longs to be able to rid oneself of the
habit of rejection and selection, and to enjoy all the dear, obviously
luscious, idiotic emotions without an afterthought! And indeed, however
much we may admire the Chromatic Fantasia of Bach, we all of us have a
soft spot somewhere in our minds that is sensitive to “Roses in
Picardy.” But the soft spot is surrounded by hard spots; the enjoyment
is never unmixed with critical disapprobation. The excuses for working
up a communal emotion, even communal emotion itself, are rejected as too
gross. We turn from them as a cœnobite of the Thebaid would have turned
from dancing girls or a steaming dish of tripe and onions.

I have before me now a little book, recently arrived from America, which
points out the way in which the random mob emotion may be systematically
organized into a kind of religion. This volume, _The Will of Song_ (Boni
& Liveright, 70 c.), is the joint production of Messrs. Harry Barnhart
and Percy MacKaye. “How are art and social service to be reconciled?...
How shall the Hermit Soul of the Individual Poet give valid, spontaneous
expression to the Communal Soul of assembled multitudes? How may the
surging Tides of Man be sluiced in Conduits of Art, without losing their
primal glory and momentum?” These questions and many others, involving a
great expense of capital letters, are asked by Mr. MacKaye and answered
in _The Will of Song_, which bears the qualifying sub-title, “A Dramatic
Service of Community Singing.”

The service is democratically undogmatic. Abstractions, such as Will,
Imagination, Joy, Love and Liberty, some of whom are represented in the
dramatic performance, not by individuals, but by Group Personages
(_i.e._, choruses), chant about Brotherhood in a semi-Biblical
phraseology that is almost wholly empty of content. It is all
delightfully vague and non-committal, like a Cabinet Minister’s speech
about the League of Nations, and, like such a speech, leaves behind it a
comfortable glow, a noble feeling of uplift. But, like Cabinet
Ministers, preachers and all whose profession it is to move the people
by the emission of words, the authors of _The Will of Song_ are well
aware that what matters in a popular work of art is not the intellectual
content so much as the picturesqueness of its form and the emotion with
which it is presented. In the staging—if such a term is not
irreverent—of their service, Messrs. Barnhart and MacKaye have borrowed
from Roman Catholic ritual all its most effective emotion-creators. The
darknesses, the illuminations, the chiming bells, the solemn mysterious
voices, the choral responses—all these traditional devices have been
most scientifically exploited in the Communal Service.

These are the stage directions which herald the opening of the service:

  As the final song of the Prelude ceases, the assembly hall grows
  suddenly dark, and the DARKNESS is filled with fanfare of blowing
  TRUMPETS. And now, taking up the trumpets’ refrain, the Orchestra
  plays an elemental music, suggestive of rain, wind, thunder and the
  rushing of waters; from behind the raised Central Seat great Flashes
  of Fire spout upward, and while they are flaring there rises a FLAME
  GOLD FIGURE, in a cone of light, who calls with deep, vibrant voice:
  “Who has risen up from the heart of the people?” Instantaneous, from
  three portions of the assembly, the VOICES OF THREE GROUPS, Men, Women
  and Children, answer from the dark in triple unison: “I!”

Even from the cold print one can see that this opening would be
extremely effective. But doubts assail me. I have a horrid suspicion
that that elemental music would not sweep me off my feet as it ought to.
My fears are justified when, looking up the musical programme, I
discover that the elemental music is by Langey, and that the orchestral
accompaniments that follow are the work of Massenet, Tschaikovsky,
Langey once more, Julia Ward Howe and Sinding. Alas! once more one finds
oneself the slave of one’s habit of selection and rejection. One would
find oneself left out in the cold just because one couldn’t stand
Massenet. Those who have seen Sir James Barrie’s latest play, _Mary
Rose_, will perhaps recall the blasts of music which prelude the piece
and recur at every mystical moment throughout the play. In theory one
ought to have mounted on the wings of that music into a serene
acceptance of Sir James Barrie’s supernatural machinery; one ought to
have been filled by it with deeply religious emotions. In practice,
however, one found oneself shrinking with quivering nerves from the
poignant vulgarity of that _Leitmotif_, isolated by what should have
united one with the author and the rest of the audience. The cœnobite
would like to eat the tripe and onions, but finds by experiment that the
smell of the dish makes him feel rather sick.

One must not, however, reject such things as _The Will of Song_ as
absolutely and entirely bad. They are useful, they are even good, on
their own plane and for people who belong to a certain order of the
spiritual hierarchy. _The Will of Song_, set to elemental music by
Massenet and Julia Ward Howe, may be a moving spiritual force for people
to whom, shall we say, Wagner means nothing; just as Wagner himself may
be of spiritual importance to people belonging to a slightly higher
caste, but still incapable of understanding or getting any good out of
the highest, the transcendent works of art—out of the Mass in D, for
example, or Sonata Op. 111.

The democratically minded will ask what right we have to say that the
Mass in D is better than the works of Julia Ward Howe, what right we
have to assign a lower place in the spiritual hierarchy to the admirers
of _The Will of Song_ than to the admirers of Beethoven. They will
insist that there is no hierarchy at all; that every creature possessing
humanity, possessing even life, is as good and as important, by the mere
fact of that possession, as any other creature. It is not altogether
easy to answer these objections. The arguments on both sides are
ultimately based on conviction and faith. The best one can do to
convince the paradoxical democrat of the real superiority of the Mass in
D over _The Will of Song_ is to point out that, in a sense, one contains
the other; that _The Will of Song_ is a part, and a very small part at
that, of a great Whole of human experience, to which the Mass in D much
more nearly approximates. In _The Will of Song_, and its “elemental”
accompaniment one knows exactly how every effect is obtained; its range
of emotional and intellectual experience is extremely limited and
perfectly familiar. But the range of the Mass in D is enormously much
larger; it includes within itself the range of _The Will of Song_, takes
it for granted, so to speak, and reaches out into remoter spheres of
experience. It is in a real sense quantitatively larger than _The Will
of Song_. To the democrat who believes in majorities this is an argument
which must surely prove convincing.




                            X: ACCUMULATIONS


In the brevity of life and the perishableness of material things the
moral philosophers have always found one of their happiest themes.
“Time, which antiquates Antiquities, hath an Art to make dust of all
things.” There is nothing more moving than those swelling elegiac organ
notes in which they have celebrated the mortality of man and all his
works. Those of us for whom the proper study of mankind is books dwell
with the most poignant melancholy over the destruction of literary
treasures. We think of all the pre-Platonic philosophers of whose
writings only a few sentences remain. We think of Sappho’s poems, all
but completely blotted from our knowledge. We think of the missing
fragments of the “Satyricon,” and of many other precious pages which
once were and are now no more. We complain of the holes that time has
picked in the records of history, bewailing the loss of innumerable
vanished documents. As for buildings, pictures, statues and the
accumulated evidence of whole civilizations, all destroyed as though
they had never been, they do not belong to our literary province, and,
if they did, would be too numerous to catalogue even summarily.

But because men have once thought and felt in a certain way it does not
follow that they will for ever continue to do so. There seems every
probability that our descendants, some two or three centuries hence,
will wax pathetic in their complaints, not of the fragility, but the
horrible persistence and indestructibility of things. They will feel
themselves smothered by the intolerable accumulation of the years. The
men of to-day are so deeply penetrated with the sense of the
perishableness of matter that they have begun to take immense
precautions to preserve everything they can. Desolated by the
carelessness of our ancestors, we are making very sure that our
descendants shall lack no documents when they come to write our history.
All is systematically kept and catalogued. Old things are carefully
patched and propped into continued existence; things now new are hoarded
up and protected from decay.

To walk through the book-stores of one of the world’s great libraries is
an experience that cannot fail to set one thinking on the appalling
indestructibility of matter. A few years ago I explored the recently dug
cellars into which the overflow of the Bodleian pours in an unceasing
stream. The cellars extend under the northern half of the great
quadrangle in whose centre stands the Radcliffe Camera. These catacombs
are two storeys deep and lined with impermeable concrete. “The muddy
damps and ropy slime” of the traditional vault are absent in this great
necropolis of letters; huge ventilating pipes breathe blasts of a dry
and heated wind, that makes the place as snug and as unsympathetic to
decay as the deserts of Central Asia. The books stand in metal cases
constructed so as to slide in and out of position on rails. So ingenious
is the arrangement of the cases that it is possible to fill two-thirds
of the available space, solidly, with books. Twenty years or so hence,
when the existing vaults will take no more books, a new cellar can be
dug on the opposite side of the Camera. And when that is full—it is only
a matter of half a century from now—what then? We shrug our shoulders.
After us the deluge. But let us hope that Bodley’s Librarian of 1970
will have the courage to emend the last word to “bonfire.” To the
bonfire! That is the only satisfactory solution of an intolerable
problem.

The deliberate preservation of things must be compensated for by their
deliberate and judicious destruction. Otherwise the world will be
overwhelmed by the accumulation of antique objects. Pigs and rabbits and
watercress, when they were first introduced into New Zealand, threatened
to lay waste the country, because there were no compensating forces of
destruction to put a stop to their indefinite multiplication. In the
same way, mere things, once they are set above the natural laws of
decay, will end by burying us, unless we set about methodically to get
rid of the nuisance. The plea that they should all be preserved—every
novel by Nat Gould, every issue of the _Funny Wonder_—as historical
documents is not a sound one. Where too many documents exist it is
impossible to write history at all. “For ignorance,” in the felicitous
words of Mr. Lytton Strachey, “is the first requisite of the
historian—ignorance which simplifies and clarifies, which selects and
omits, with a placid perfection unattainable by the highest art.” Nobody
wants to know everything—the irrelevancies as well as the important
facts—about the past; or in any case nobody ought to desire to know.
Those who do, those who are eaten up by an itch for mere facts and
useless information, are the wretched victims of a vice no less
reprehensible than greed or drunkenness.

Hand in hand with this judicious process of destruction must go an
elaborate classification of what remains. As Mr. Wells says in his
large, opulent way, “the future world-state’s organization of scientific
research and record compared with that of to-day will be like an ocean
liner beside the dug-out canoe of some early heliolithic wanderer.” With
the vast and indiscriminate multiplication of books and periodicals our
organization of records tends to become ever more heliolithic. Useful
information on any given subject is so widely scattered or may be hidden
in such obscure places that the student is often at a loss to know what
he ought to study or where. An immense international labour of
bibliography and classification must be undertaken at no very distant
date, if future generations of researchers are to make the fullest use
of the knowledge that has already been gained.

But this constructive labour will be tedious and insipid compared with
the glorious business of destruction. Huge bonfires of paper will blaze
for days and weeks together, whenever the libraries undertake their
periodical purgation. The only danger, and, alas! it is a very real
danger, is that the libraries will infallibly purge themselves of the
wrong books. We all know what librarians are; and not only librarians,
but critics, literary men, general public—everybody, in fact, with the
exception of ourselves—we know what they are like, we know them: there
never was a set of people with such bad taste! Committees will doubtless
be set up to pass judgment on books, awarding acquittals and
condemnations in magisterial fashion. It will be a sort of gigantic
Hawthornden competition. At that thought I find that the flames of my
great bonfires lose much of their imagined lustre.




                      XI: ON DEVIATING INTO SENSE


There is a story, very dear for some reason to our ancestors, that
Apelles, or I forget what other Greek painter, grown desperate at the
failure of his efforts to portray realistically the foam on a dog’s
mouth, threw his sponge at the picture in a pet, and was rewarded for
his ill-temper by discovering that the resultant smudge was the living
image of the froth whose aspect he had been unable, with all his art, to
recapture. No one will ever know the history of all the happy mistakes,
the accidents and unconscious deviations into genius, that have helped
to enrich the world’s art. They are probably countless. I myself have
deviated more than once into accidental felicities. Recently, for
example, the hazards of careless typewriting caused me to invent a new
portmanteau word of the most brilliantly Laforguian quality. I had meant
to write the phrase “the Human Comedy,” but, by a happy slip, I put my
finger on the letter that stands next to “C” on the universal keyboard.
When I came to read over the completed page I found that I had written
“the Human Vomedy.” Was there ever a criticism of life more succinct and
expressive? To the more sensitive and queasy among the gods the last few
years must indeed have seemed a vomedy of the first order.

The grossest forms of mistake have played quite a distinguished part in
the history of letters. One thinks, for example, of the name Criseida or
Cressida manufactured out of a Greek accusative, of that Spenserian
misunderstanding of Chaucer which gave currency to the rather ridiculous
substantive “derring-do.” Less familiar, but more deliciously absurd, is
Chaucer’s slip in reading “naves ballatrices” for “naves
bellatrices”—ballet-ships instead of battle-ships—and his translation
“shippes hoppesteres.” But these broad, straightforward howlers are
uninteresting compared with the more subtle deviations into originality
occasionally achieved by authors who were trying their best not to be
original. Nowhere do we find more remarkable examples of accidental
brilliance than among the post-Chaucerian poets, whose very indistinct
knowledge of what precisely _was_ the metre in which they were trying to
write often caused them to produce very striking variations on the
staple English measure.

Chaucer’s variations from the decasyllable norm were deliberate. So, for
the most part, were those of his disciple Lydgate, whose favourite
“broken-backed” line, lacking the first syllable of the iambus that
follows the cæsura, is metrically of the greatest interest to
contemporary poets. Lydgate’s characteristic line follows this model:

               For speechéless nothing maist thou speed.

Judiciously employed, the broken-backed line might yield very beautiful
effects. Lydgate, as has been said, was probably pretty conscious of
what he was doing. But his procrustean methods were apt to be a little
indiscriminate, and one wonders sometimes whether he was playing
variations on a known theme or whether he was rather tentatively groping
after the beautiful regularity of his master Chaucer. The later
fifteenth and sixteenth century poets seem to have worked very much in
the dark. The poems of such writers as Hawes and Skelton abound in the
vaguest parodies of the decasyllable line. Anything from seven to
fifteen syllables will serve their turn. With them the variations are
seldom interesting. Chance had not much opportunity of producing subtle
metrical effects with a man like Skelton, whose mind was naturally so
full of jigging doggerel that his variations on the decasyllable are
mostly in the nature of rough skeltonics. I have found interesting
accidental variations on the decasyllable in Heywood, the writer of
moralities. This, from the _Play of Love_, has a real metrical beauty:

          Felt ye but one pang such as I feel many,
          One pang of despair or one pang of desire,
          One pang of one displeasant look of her eye,
          One pang of one word of her mouth as in ire,
          Or in restraint of her love which I desire—
          One pang of all these, felt once in all your life,
          Should quail your opinion and quench all our strife.

These dactylic resolutions of the third and fourth lines are extremely
interesting.

But the most remarkable example of accidental metrical invention that I
have yet come across is to be found in the Earl of Surrey’s translation
of Horace’s ode on the golden mean. Surrey was one of the pioneers of
the reaction against the vagueness and uncertain carelessness of the
post-Chaucerians. From the example of Italian poetry he had learned that
a line must have a fixed number of syllables. In all his poems his aim
is always to achieve regularity at whatever cost. To make sure of having
ten syllables in every line it is evident that Surrey made use of his
fingers as well as his ears. We see him at his worst and most laborious
in the first stanza of his translation:

             Of thy life, Thomas, this compass well mark:
             Ne by coward dread in shunning storms dark
             Not aye with full sails the high seas to beat;
             On shallow shores thy keel in peril freat.

The ten syllables are there all right, but except in the last line there
is no recognizable rhythm of any kind, whether regular or irregular. But
when Surrey comes to the second stanza—

                    Auream quisquis mediocritatem
                    Diligit, tutus caret obsoleti
                    Sordibus tecti, caret invidenda
                      Sobrius aula—

some lucky accident inspires him with the genius to translate in these
words:

              Whoso gladly halseth the golden mean,
              Void of dangers advisedly hath his home;
              Not with loathsome muck as a den unclean,
              Nor palace like, whereat disdain may gloam.

Not only is this a very good translation, but it is also a very
interesting and subtle metrical experiment. What could be more
felicitous than this stanza made up of three trochaic lines, quickened
by beautiful dactylic resolutions, and a final iambic line of regular
measure—the recognized tonic chord that brings the music to its close?
And yet the tunelessness of the first stanza is enough to prove that
Surrey’s achievement is as much a product of accident as the foam on the
jaws of Apelles’ dog. He was doing his best all the time to write
decasyllabics with the normal iambic beat of the last line. His failures
to do so were sometimes unconscious strokes of genius.




                        XII: POLITE CONVERSATION


There are some people to whom the most difficult to obey of all the
commandments is that which enjoins us to suffer fools gladly. The
prevalence of folly, its monumental, unchanging permanence and its
almost invariable triumph over intelligence are phenomena which they
cannot contemplate without experiencing a passion of righteous
indignation or, at the least, of ill-temper. Sages like Anatole France,
who can probe and anatomize human stupidity and still remain serenely
detached, are rare. These reflections were suggested by a book recently
published in New York and entitled _The American Credo_. The authors of
this work are those _enfants terribles_ of American criticism, Messrs.
H. L. Mencken and George Jean Nathan. They have compiled a list of four
hundred and eighty-eight articles of faith which form the fundamental
Credo of the American people, prefacing them with a very entertaining
essay on the national mind:

  Truth shifts and changes like a cataract of diamonds; its aspect is
  never precisely the same at two successive moments. But error flows
  down the channel of history like some great stream of lava or
  infinitely lethargic glacier. It is the one relatively fixed thing in
  a world of chaos.

To look through the articles of the Credo is to realize that there is a
good deal of truth in this statement. Such beliefs as the following—not
by any means confined to America alone—are probably at least as old as
the Great Pyramid:

That if a woman, about to become a mother, plays the piano every day,
her baby will be born a Victor Herbert.

That the accumulation of great wealth always brings with it great
unhappiness.

That it is bad luck to kill a spider.

That water rots the hair and thus causes baldness.

That if a bride wears an old garter with her new finery, she will have a
happy married life.

That children were much better behaved twenty years ago than they are
to-day.

And most of the others in the collection, albeit clothed in forms
distinctively contemporary and American, are simply variations on
notions as immemorial.

Inevitably, as one reads _The American Credo_, one is reminded of an
abler, a more pitiless and ferocious onslaught on stupidity, I mean
Swift’s “_Complete Collection of Genteel and Ingenious Conversation,
according to the most polite mode and method now used at Court and in
the Best Companies of England_. In three Dialogues. By Simon Wagstaff,
Esq.” I was inspired after reading Messrs. Mencken and Nathan’s work to
refresh my memories of this diabolic picture of the social amenities.
And what a book it is! There is something almost appalling in the way it
goes on and on, a continuous, never-ceasing stream of imbecility. Simon
Wagstaff, it will be remembered, spent the best part of forty years in
collecting and digesting these gems of polite conversation:

  I can faithfully assure the reader that there is not one single witty
  phrase in the whole Collection which has not received the Stamp and
  Approbation of at least One Hundred Years, and how much longer it is
  hard to determine; he may therefore be secure to find them all
  genuine, sterling and authentic.

How genuine, sterling and authentic Mr. Wagstaff’s treasures of polite
conversation are is proved by the great number of them which have
withstood all the ravages of time, and still do as good service to-day
as they did in the early seventeen-hundreds or in the days of Henry
VIII.: “Go, you Girl, and warm some fresh Cream.” “Indeed, Madam,
there’s none left; for the Cat has eaten it all.” “I doubt it was a Cat
with Two Legs.”

“And, pray, What News, Mr. Neverout?” “Why, Madam, Queen Elizabeth’s
dead.” (It would be interesting to discover at exactly what date Queen
Anne took the place of Queen Elizabeth in this grand old repartee, or
who was the monarch referred to when the Virgin Queen was still alive.
Aspirants to the degree of B. or D.Litt. might do worse than to take
this problem as a subject for their thesis.)

Some of the choicest phrases have come down in the world since Mr.
Wagstaff’s day. Thus, Miss Notable’s retort to Mr. Neverout, “Go, teach
your Grannam to suck Eggs,” could only be heard now in the dormitory of
a preparatory school. Others have become slightly modified. Mr. Neverout
says, “Well, all Things have an End, and a pudden has two.” I think we
may flatter ourselves that the modern emendation, “except a roly-poly
pudding, which has two,” is an improvement.

Mr. Wagstaff’s second dialogue, wherein he treats of Polite Conversation
at meals, contains more phrases that testify to the unbroken continuity
of tradition than either of the others. The conversation that centres on
the sirloin of beef is worthy to be recorded in its entirety:

  LADY SMART. Come, Colonel, handle your Arms. Shall I help you to some
  Beef?

  COLONEL. If your Ladyship please; and, pray, don’t cut like a
  Mother-in-law, but send me a large Slice; for I love to lay a good
  Foundation. I vow, ’tis a noble Sir-loyn.

  NEVEROUT. Ay; here’s cut and come again.

  MISS. But, pray; why is it call’d a Sir-loyn?

  LORD SMART. Why, you must know that our King James the First, who
  lov’d good Eating, being invited to Dinner by one of his Nobles, and
  seeing a large Loyn of Beef at his Table, he drew out his Sword, and,
  in a Frolic, knighted it. Few people know the Secret of this.

How delightful it is to find that we have Mr. Wagstaff’s warrant for
such gems of wisdom as, “Cheese digests everything except itself,” and
“If you eat till you’re cold, you’ll live to grow old”! If they were a
hundred years old in his day they are fully three hundred now. Long may
they survive! I was sorry, however, to notice that one of the best of
Mr. Wagstaff’s phrases has been, in the revolution of time, completely
lost. Indeed, before I had read Aubrey’s “Lives,” Lord Sparkish’s
remark, “Come, box it about; ’twill come to my Father at last,” was
quite incomprehensible to me. The phrase is taken from a story of Sir
Walter Raleigh and his son.

  Sir Walter Raleigh [says Aubrey] being invited to dinner to some great
  person where his son was to goe with him, he sayd to his son, “Thou
  art expected to-day at dinner to goe along with me, but thou art so
  quarrelsome and affronting that I am ashamed to have such a beare in
  my company.” Mr. Walter humbled himselfe to his father and promised he
  would behave himselfe mighty mannerly. So away they went. He sate next
  to his father and was very demure at least halfe dinner time. Then
  sayd he, “I this morning, not having the feare of God before my eies,
  but by the instigation of the devill, went....”

At this point Mr. Clark, in his edition, suppresses four lines of
Aubrey’s text; but one can imagine the sort of thing Master Walter said.

  Sir Walter, being strangely surprized and putt out of countenance at
  so great a table, gives his son a damned blow over the face. His son,
  as rude as he was, would not strike his father, but strikes over the
  face the gentleman that sate next to him and sayd, “Box about: ’twill
  come to my father anon.” ’Tis now a common-used proverb.

And so it still deserves to be; how, when and why it became extinct, I
have no idea. Here is another good subject for a thesis.

There are but few things in Mr. Wagstaff’s dialogue which appear
definitely out of date and strange to us, and these super-annuations can
easily be accounted for. Thus the repeal of the Criminal Laws has made
almost incomprehensible the constant references to hanging made by Mr.
Wagstaff’s personages. The oaths and the occasional mild grossnesses
have gone out of fashion in mixed polite society. Otherwise their
conversation is in all essentials exactly the same as the conversation
of the present day. And this is not to be wondered at; for, as a wise
man has said:

  Speech at the present time retains strong evidence of the survival in
  it of the function of herd recognition.... The function of
  conversation is ordinarily regarded as being the exchange of ideas and
  information. Doubtless it has come to have such a function, but an
  objective examination of ordinary conversation shows that the actual
  conveyance of ideas takes a very small part in it. As a rule the
  exchange seems to consist of ideas which are necessarily common to the
  two speakers and are known to be so by each.... Conversation between
  persons unknown to one another is apt to be rich in the ritual of
  recognition. When one hears or takes part in these elaborate
  evolutions, gingerly proffering one after another of one’s marks of
  identity, one’s views on the weather, on fresh air and draughts, on
  the Government and on uric acid, watching intently for the first low
  hint of a growl, which will show one belongs to the wrong pack and
  must withdraw, it is impossible not to be reminded of the similar
  manœuvres of the dog and to be thankful that Nature has provided us
  with a less direct, though perhaps a more tedious, code.




                       XIII: NATIONALITY IN LOVE


The hazards of indiscriminate rummaging in bookshops have introduced me
to two volumes of verse which seem to me (though I am ordinarily very
sceptical of those grandiose generalizations about racial and national
characteristics, so beloved of a certain class of literary people) to
illustrate very clearly some of the differences between the French and
English mind. The first is a little book published some few months back
and entitled _Les Baisers_.... The publisher says of it in one of those
exquisitely literary puffs which are the glory of the Paris book trade:
“Un volume de vers? Non pas! Simplement des baisers mis en vers, des
baisers variés comme l’heure qui passe, inconstants comme l’Amour
lui-même.... Baisers, baisers, c’est toute leur troublante musique qui
chante dans ces rimes.” The other volume hails from the antipodes and is
called _Songs of Love and Life_. No publisher’s puff accompanies it; but
a coloured picture on the dust-wrapper represents a nymph frantically
clutching at a coy shepherd. A portrait of the authoress serves as a
frontispiece. Both books are erotic in character, and both are very
indifferent in poetical quality. They are only interesting as
illustrations, the more vivid because of their very second-rateness, of
the two characteristic methods of approach, French and English, to the
theme of physical passion.

The author of _Les Baisers_ approaches his amorous experiences with the
detached manner of a psychologist interested in the mental reactions of
certain corporeal pleasures whose mechanism he has previously studied in
his capacity of physiological observer. His attitude is the same as that
of the writers of those comedies of manners which hold the stage in the
theatres of the boulevards. It is dry, precise, matter-of-fact and
almost scientific. The comedian of the boulevards does not concern
himself with trying to find some sort of metaphysical justification for
the raptures of physical passion, nor is he in any way a propagandist of
sensuality. He is simply an analyst of facts, whose business it is to
get all the wit that is possible out of an equivocal situation.
Similarly, the author of these poems is far too highly sophisticated to
imagine that

                     every spirit as it is most pure,
               And hath in it the more of heavenly light,
               So it the fairer body doth procure
               To habit in, and it more fairly dight
               With cheerful grace and amiable sight.
               For of the soul the body form doth take;
               For soul is form and doth the body make.

He does not try to make us believe that physical pleasures have a divine
justification. Neither has he any wish to “make us grovel, hand and foot
in Belial’s gripe.” He is merely engaged in remembering “des heures et
des entretiens” which were extremely pleasant—hours which strike for
every one, conversations and meetings which are taking place in all
parts of the world and at every moment.

This attitude towards _volupté_ is sufficiently old in France to have
made possible the evolution of a very precise and definite vocabulary in
which to describe its phenomena. This language is as exact as the
technical jargon of a trade, and as elegant as the Latin of Petronius.
It is a language of which we have no equivalent in our English
literature. It is impossible in English to describe _volupté_ elegantly;
it is hardly possible to write of it without being gross. To begin with,
we do not even possess a word equivalent to _volupté_. “Voluptuousness”
is feeble and almost meaningless; “pleasure” is hopelessly inadequate.
From the first the English writer is at a loss; he cannot even name
precisely the thing he proposes to describe and analyze. But for the
most part he has not much use for such a language. His approach to the
subject is not dispassionate and scientific, and he has no need for
technicalities. The English amorist is inclined to approach the subject
rapturously, passionately, philosophically—almost in any way that is not
the wittily matter-of-fact French way.

In our rich Australian _Songs of Love and Life_ we see the
rapturous-philosophic approach reduced to something that is very nearly
the absurd. Overcome with the intensities of connubial bliss, the
authoress feels it necessary to find a sort of justification for them by
relating them in some way with the cosmos. God, we are told,

                  looking through His hills on you and me,
              Feeds Heaven upon the flame of our desire.

Or again:

              Our passions breathe their own wild harmony,
              And pour out music at a clinging kiss.
              Sing on, O Soul, our lyric of desire,
              For God Himself is in the melody.

Meanwhile the author of _Les Baisers_, always elegantly _terre-à-terre_,
formulates his more concrete desires in an Alexandrine worthy of Racine:

             Viens. Je veux dégrafer moi-même ton corsage.

The desire to involve the cosmos in our emotions is by no means confined
to the poetess of _Songs of Love and Life_. In certain cases we are all
apt to invoke the universe in an attempt to explain and account for
emotions whose intensity seems almost inexplicable. This is particularly
true of the emotions aroused in us by the contemplation of beauty. Why
we should feel so strongly when confronted with certain forms and
colours, certain sounds, certain verbal suggestions of form and
harmony—why the thing which we call beauty should move us at
all—goodness only knows. In order to explain the phenomenon, poets have
involved the universe in the matter, asserting that they are moved by
the contemplation of physical beauty because it is the symbol of the
divine. The intensities of physical passion have presented the same
problem. Ashamed of admitting that such feelings can have a purely
sublunary cause, we affirm, like the Australian poetess, that “God
Himself is in the melody.” That, we argue, can be the only explanation
for the violence of the emotion. This view of the matter is particularly
common in a country with fundamental puritanic traditions like England,
where the dry, matter-of-fact attitude of the French seems almost
shocking. The puritan feels bound to justify the facts of beauty and
_volupté_. They must be in some way made moral before he can accept
them. The French unpuritanic mind accepts the facts as they are tendered
to it by experience, at their face value.




                       XIV: HOW THE DAYS DRAW IN!


The autumn equinox is close upon us with all its presages of mortality,
a shortening day, a colder and longer night. How the days draw in! Fear
of ridicule hardly allows one to make the melancholy constatation. It is
a conversational gambit that, like fool’s mate, can only be used against
the simplest and least experienced of players. And yet how much of the
world’s most moving poetry is nothing but a variation on the theme of
this in-drawing day! The certainty of death has inspired more poetry
than the hope of immortality. The visible transience of frail and lovely
matter has impressed itself more profoundly on the mind of man than the
notion of spiritual permanence.

             Et l’on verra bientôt surgir du sein de l’onde
             La première clarté de mon dernier soleil.

That is an article of faith from which nobody can withhold assent.

Of late I have found myself almost incapable of enjoying any poetry
whose inspiration is not despair or melancholy. Why, I hardly know.
Perhaps it is due to the chronic horror of the political situation. For
heaven knows, that is quite sufficient to account for a taste for
melancholy verse. The subject of any European government to-day feels
all the sensations of Gulliver in the paws of the Queen of Brobdingnag’s
monkey—the sensations of some small and helpless being at the mercy of
something monstrous and irresponsible and idiotic. There sits the monkey
“on the ridge of a building five hundred yards above the ground, holding
us like a baby in one of his fore paws.” Will he let go? Will he squeeze
us to death? The best we can hope for is to be “let drop on a ridge
tile,” with only enough bruises to keep one in bed for a fortnight. But
it seems very unlikely that some “honest lad will climb up and, putting
us in his breeches pocket, bring us down safe.” However, I divagate a
little from my subject, which is the poetry of melancholy.

Some day I shall compile an Oxford Book of Depressing Verse, which shall
contain nothing but the most magnificent expressions of melancholy and
despair. All the obvious people will be in it and as many of the obscure
apostles of gloom as vague and miscellaneous reading shall have made
known to me. A duly adequate amount of space, for example, will be
allotted to that all but great poet, Fulke Greville, Lord Brooke. For
dark magnificence there are not many things that can rival that summing
up against life and human destiny at the end of his “Mustapha.”

             Oh, wearisome condition of humanity,
             Born under one law to another bound,
             Vainly begot and yet forbidden vanity,
             Created sick, commanded to be sound.
               What meaneth nature by these diverse laws,
               Passion and reason, self-division’s cause?

             Is it the mark or majesty of power
             To make offences that it may forgive?
             Nature herself doth her own self deflower
             To hate those errors she herself doth give....
               If nature did not take delight in blood,
               She would have made more easy ways to good.

Milton aimed at justifying the ways of God to man; Fulke Greville
gloomily denounces them.

Nor shall I omit from my anthology the extraordinary description in the
Prologue to “Alaham” of the Hell of Hells and of Privation, the peculiar
torment of the place:

             Thou monster horrible, under whose ugly doom
             Down in eternity’s perpetual night
             Man’s temporal sins bear torments infinite,
             For change of desolation must I come
             To tempt the earth and to profane the light.
             A place there is, upon no centre placed,
             Deep under depths as far as is the sky
             Above the earth, dark, infinitely spaced,
             Pluto the king, the kingdom misery.
             Privation would reign there, by God not made,
             But creature of uncreated sin,
             Whose being is all beings to invade,
             To have no ending though it did begin;
             And so of past, things present and to come,
             To give depriving, not tormenting doom.
             But horror in the understanding mixed....

Like most of his contemporaries in those happy days before the notion of
progress had been invented, Lord Brooke was what Peacock would have
called a “Pejorationist.” His political views (and they were also
Sidney’s) are reflected in his _Life of Sir Philip Sidney_. The best
that a statesman can do, according to these Elizabethan pessimists, is
to patch and prop the decaying fabric of society in the hope of staving
off for a little longer the final inevitable crash. It seems curious to
us, who have learnt to look at the Elizabethan age as the most splendid
in English history, that the men who were the witnesses of these
splendours should have regarded their time as an age of decadence.

The notion of the Fall was fruitful in despairing poetry. One of the
most remarkable products of this doctrine is a certain “Sonnet Chrétien”
by the seventeenth-century writer, Jean Ogier de Gombauld, surnamed “le
Beau Ténébreux.”

         Cette source de mort, cette homicide peste,
         Ce péché dont l’enfer a le monde infecté,
         M’a laissé pour tout être un bruit d’avoir été,
         Et je suis de moi-même une image funeste.
         L’Auteur de l’univers, le Monarque céleste
         S’était rendu visible en ma seule beauté.
         Ce vieux titre d’honneur qu’autrefois j’ai porté
         Et que je porte encore, est tout ce qui me reste.

         Mais c’est fait de ma gloire, et je ne suis plus rien
         Qu’un fantôme qui court après l’ombre d’un bien,
         Ou qu’un corps animé du seul ver qui le ronge.
         Non, je ne suis plus rien quand je veux m’éprouver,
         Qu’un esprit ténébreux qui voit tout comme en songe
         Et cherche incessament ce qu’il ne peut trouver.

There are astonishing lines in this, lines that might have been written
by a Baudelaire, if he had been born a Huguenot and two hundred years
before his time. That “carcase animated by the sole gnawing worm” is
something that one would expect to find rotting away among the sombre
and beautiful Flowers of Evil.

An amusing speculation. If Steinach’s rejuvenating operations on the old
become the normal and accepted thing, what will be the effect on poetry
of this abolition of the depressing process of decay? It may be that the
poetry of melancholy and despair is destined to lose its place in
literature, and that a spirit of what William James called
“healthy-mindedness” will inherit its kingdom. Many “eternal truths”
have already found their way on to the dust-heap of antiquated ideas. It
may be that this last and seemingly most inexorable of them—that life is
short and subject to a dreadful decay—will join the other great
commonplaces which have already perished out of literature.

                The flesh is bruckle, the fiend is slee:
                  Timor mortis conturbat me:—

Some day, it may be, these sentiments will seem as hopelessly
superannuated as Milton’s cosmology.




                               XV: TIBET


In moments of complete despair, when it seems that all is for the worst
in the worst of all possible worlds, it is cheering to discover that
there are places where stupidity reigns even more despotically than in
Western Europe, where civilization is based on principles even more
fantastically unreasonable. Recent experience has shown me that the
depression into which the Peace, Mr. Churchill, the state of
contemporary literature, have conspired to plunge the mind, can be
sensibly relieved by a study, even superficial, of the manners and
customs of Tibet. The spectacle of an ancient and elaborate civilization
of which almost no detail is not entirely idiotic is in the highest
degree comforting and refreshing. It fills us with hopes of the ultimate
success of our own civilization; it restores our wavering
self-satisfaction in being citizens of industrialized Europe. Compared
with Tibet, we are prodigious. Let us cherish the comparison.

My informant about Tibetan civilization is a certain Japanese monk of
the name of Kawaguchi, who spent three years in Tibet at the beginning
of the present century. His account of the experience has been
translated into English, and published, with the title _Three Years in
Tibet_, by the Theosophical Society. It is one of the great travel books
of the world, and, so far as I am aware, the most interesting book on
Tibet that exists. Kawaguchi enjoyed opportunities in Tibet which no
European traveller could possibly have had. He attended the University
of Lhasa, he enjoyed the acquaintance of the Dalai Lama himself, he was
intimate with one of the four Ministers of Finance, he was the friend of
lama and layman, of all sorts and conditions of Tibetans, from the
highest class to the lowest—the despicable caste of smiths and butchers.
He knew his Tibet intimately; for those three years, indeed, he was for
all practical purposes a Tibetan. This is something which no European
explorer can claim, and it is this which gives Kawaguchi’s book its
unique interest.

The Japanese, like people of every other nationality except the Chinese,
are not permitted to enter Tibet. Mr. Kawaguchi did not allow this to
stand in the way of his pious mission—for his purpose in visiting Tibet
was to investigate the Buddhist writings and traditions of the place. He
made his way to India, and in a long stay at Darjeeling familiarized
himself with the Tibetan language. He then set out to walk across the
Himalayas. Not daring to affront the strictly guarded gates which bar
the direct route to Lhasa, he penetrated Tibet at its southwestern
corner, underwent prodigious hardships in an uninhabited desert eighteen
thousand feet above sea-level, visited the holy lake of Manosarovara,
and finally, after astonishing adventures, arrived in Lhasa. Here he
lived for nearly three years, passing himself off as a Chinaman. At the
end of that time his secret leaked out, and he was obliged to accelerate
his departure for India. So much for Kawaguchi himself, though I should
have liked to say more of him; for a more charming and sympathetic
character never revealed himself in a book.

Tibet is so full of fantastic low comedy that one hardly knows where to
begin a catalogue of its absurdities. Shall we start with the Tibetans’
highly organized service of trained nurses, whose sole duty it is to
prevent their patients from going to sleep? or with the Dalai Lama’s
chief source of income—the sale of pills made of dung, at, literally, a
guinea a box? or with the Tibetan custom of never washing from the
moment of birth, when, however, they are plentifully anointed with
melted butter, to the moment of death? And then there is the University
of Lhasa, which an eminent Cambridge philosopher has compared with the
University of Oxford—somewhat unjustly, perhaps; but let that pass. At
the University of Lhasa the student is instructed in logic and
philosophy; every year of his stay he has to learn by heart from one to
five or six hundred pages of holy texts. He is also taught mathematics,
but in Tibet this art is not carried farther than subtraction. It takes
twenty years to get a degree at the University of Lhasa—twenty years,
and then most of the candidates are ploughed. To obtain a superior Ph.D.
degree, entitling one to become a really holy and eminent lama, forty
years of application to study and to virtue are required. But it is
useless to try to make a catalogue of the delights of Tibet. There are
too many of them for mention in this small space. One can do no more
than glance at a few of the brighter spots in the system.

There is much to be said for the Tibetan system of taxation. The
Government requires a considerable revenue; for enormous sums have to be
spent in keeping perpetually burning in the principal Buddhist cathedral
of Lhasa an innumerable army of lamps, which may not be fed with
anything cheaper than clarified yak butter. This is the heaviest item of
expenditure. But a great deal of money also goes to supporting the
Tibetan clergy, who must number at least a sixth of the total
population. The money is raised by a poll tax, paid in kind, the amount
of which, fixed by ancient tradition, may, theoretically, never be
altered. Theoretically only; for the Tibetan Government employs in the
collection of taxes no fewer than twenty different standards of weight
and thirty-six different standards of measure. The pound may weigh
anything from half to a pound and a half; and the same with the units of
measure. It is thus possible to calculate with extraordinary nicety,
according to the standard of weight and measure in which your tax is
assessed, where precisely you stand in the Government’s favour. If you
are a notoriously bad character, or even if you are innocent, but live
in a bad district, your tax will have to be paid in measures of the
largest size. If you are virtuous, or, better, if you are rich, of good
family and _bien pensant_, then you will pay by weights which are only
half the nominal weight. For those whom the Government neither hates nor
loves, but regards with more or less contempt or tolerance, there are
the thirty-four intervening degrees.

Kawaguchi’s final judgment of the Tibetans, after three years’ intimate
acquaintance with them, is not a flattering one:

  The Tibetans are characterized by four serious defects, these being:
  filthiness, superstition, unnatural customs (such as polyandry), and
  unnatural art. I should be sorely perplexed if I were asked to name
  their redeeming points; but if I had to do so, I should mention first
  of all the fine climate in the vicinity of Lhasa and Shigatze, their
  sonorous and refreshing voices in reading the Text, the animated style
  of their catechisms, and their ancient art.

Certainly a bad lot of vices; but then the Tibetan virtues are not
lightly to be set aside. We English possess none of them: our climate is
abominable, our method of reading the holy texts is painful in the
extreme, our catechisms, at least in my young days, were far from
animated, and our ancient art is very indifferent stuff. But still, in
spite of these defects, in spite of Mr. Churchill and the state of
contemporary literature, we can still look at the Tibetans and feel
reassured.




                          XVI: BEAUTY IN 1920


To those who know how to read the signs of the times it will have become
apparent, in the course of these last days and weeks, that the Silly
Season is close upon us. Already—and this in July with the menace of
three or four new wars grumbling on the thunderous horizon—already a
monster of the deep has appeared at a popular seaside resort. Already
Mr. Louis McQuilland has launched in the _Daily Express_ a fierce
onslaught on the younger poets of the Asylum. Already the picture-papers
are more than half filled with photographs of bathing nymphs—photographs
that make one understand the ease with which St. Anthony rebuffed his
temptations. The newspapermen, ramping up and down like wolves, seek
their prey wherever they may find it; and it was with a unanimous howl
of delight that the whole Press went pelting after the hare started by
Mrs. Asquith in a recent instalment of her autobiography. Feebly and
belatedly, let me follow the pack.

Mrs. Asquith’s denial of beauty to the daughters of the twentieth
century has proved a god-sent giant gooseberry. It has necessitated the
calling in of a whole host of skin-food specialists, portrait-painters
and photographers to deny this far from soft impeachment. A great deal
of space has been agreeably and inexpensively filled. Every one is
satisfied, public, editors, skin-food specialists and all. But by far
the most interesting contribution to the debate was a pictorial one,
which appeared, if I remember rightly, in the _Daily News_. Side by
side, on the same page, we were shown the photographs of three beauties
of the eighteen-eighties and three of the nineteen-twenties. The
comparison was most instructive. For a great gulf separates the two
types of beauty represented by these two sets of photographs.

I remember in _If_, one of those charming conspiracies of E. V. Lucas
and George Morrow, a series of parodied fashion-plates entitled “If
Faces get any Flatter. Last year’s standard, this year’s Evening
Standard.” The faces of our living specimens of beauty have grown
flatter with those of their fashion-plate sisters. Compare the types of
1880 and 1920. The first is steep-faced, almost Roman in profile; in the
contemporary beauties the face has broadened and shortened, the profile
is less noble, less imposing, more appealingly, more alluringly pretty.
Forty years ago it was the aristocratic type that was appreciated;
to-day the popular taste has shifted from the countess to the soubrette.
Photography confirms the fact that the ladies of the ’eighties looked
like Du Maurier drawings. But among the present young generation one
looks in vain for the type; the Du Maurier damsel is as extinct as the
mesozoic reptile; the Fish girl and other kindred flat-faced species
have taken her place.

Between the ’thirties and ’fifties another type, the egg-faced girl,
reigned supreme in the affections of the world. From the early portraits
of Queen Victoria to the fashion-plates in the _Ladies’ Keepsake_ this
invariable type prevails—the egg-shaped face, the sleek hair, the
swan-like neck, the round, champagne-bottle shoulders. Compared with the
decorous impassivity of the oviform girl our flat-faced fashion-plates
are terribly abandoned and provocative. And because one expects so much
in the way of respectability from these egg-faces of an earlier age, one
is apt to be shocked when one sees them conducting themselves in ways
that seem unbefitting. One thinks of that enchanting picture of Etty’s,
“Youth on the Prow and Pleasure at the Helm.” The naiads are of the
purest egg-faced type. Their hair is sleek, their shoulders slope and
their faces are as impassive as blanks. And yet they have no clothes on.
It is almost indecent; one imagined that the egg-faced type came into
the world complete with flowing draperies.

It is not only the face of beauty that alters with the changes of
popular taste. The champagne-bottle shoulders of the oviform girl have
vanished from the modern fashion-plate and from modern life. The
contemporary hand, with its two middle fingers held together and the
forefinger and little finger splayed apart, is another recent product.
Above all, the feet have changed. In the days of the egg-faces no
fashion-plate had more than one foot. This rule will, I think, be found
invariable. That solitary foot projects, generally in a strangely
haphazard way as though it had nothing to do with a leg, from under the
edge of the skirt. And what a foot! It has no relation to those
provocative feet in Suckling’s ballad:

                   Her feet beneath her petticoat
                   Like little mice stole in and out.

It is an austere foot. It is a small, black, oblong object like a
tea-leaf. No living human being has ever seen a foot like it, for it is
utterly unlike the feet of nineteen-twenty. To-day the fashion-plate is
always a biped. The tea-leaf has been replaced by two feet of rich
baroque design, curved and florid, with insteps like the necks of Arab
horses. Faces may have changed shape, but feet have altered far more
radically. On the text, “the feet of the young women,” it would be
possible to write a profound philosophical sermon.

And while I am on the subject of feet I would like to mention another
curious phenomenon of the same kind, but affecting, this time, the
standards of male beauty. Examine the pictorial art of the eighteenth
century, and you will find that the shape of the male leg is not what it
was. In those days the calf of the leg was not a muscle that bulged to
its greatest dimensions a little below the back of the knee, to subside,
_decrescendo_, towards the ankle. No, in the eighteenth century the calf
was an even crescent, with its greatest projection opposite the middle
of the shin; the ankle, as we know it, hardly existed. This curious calf
is forced upon one’s attention by almost every minor picture-maker of
the eighteenth century, and even by some of the great masters, as, for
instance, Blake. How it came into existence I do not know. Presumably
the crescent calf was considered, in the art schools, to approach more
nearly to the Platonic Idea of the human leg than did the poor distorted
Appearance of real life. Personally, I prefer my calves with the bulge
at the top and a proper ankle at the bottom. But then I don’t hold much
with the _beau idéal_.

The process by which one type of beauty becomes popular, imposes its
tyranny for a period and then is displaced by a dissimilar type is a
mysterious one. It may be that patient historical scholars will end by
discovering some law to explain the transformation of the Du Maurier
type into the flat-face type, the tea-leaf foot into the baroque foot,
the crescent calf into the normal calf. As far as one can see at
present, these changes seem to be the result of mere hazard and
arbitrary choice. But a time will doubtless come when it will be found
that these changes of taste are as ineluctably predetermined as any
chemical change. Given the South African War, the accession of Edward
VII. and the Liberal triumph of 1906, it was, no doubt, as inevitable
that Du Maurier should have given place to Fish as that zinc subjected
to sulphuric acid should break up into ZnSO₄ + H₂. But we leave it to
others to formulate the precise workings of the law.




                          XVII: GREAT THOUGHTS


To all lovers of unfamiliar quotations, aphorisms, great thoughts and
intellectual gems, I would heartily recommend a heavy volume recently
published in Brussels and entitled _Pensées sur la Science, la Guerre et
sur des sujets très variés_. The book contains some twelve or thirteen
thousand quotations, selected from a treasure of one hundred and
twenty-three thousand great thoughts gleaned and garnered by the
industry of Dr. Maurice Legat—an industry which will be appreciated at
its value by any one who has ever made an attempt to compile a
commonplace book or private anthology of his own. The almost intolerable
labour of copying out extracts can only be avoided by the drastic use of
the scissors; and there are few who can afford the luxury of mutilating
their copies of the best authors.

For some days I made Dr. Legat’s book my _livre de chevet_. But I had
very soon to give up reading it at night, for I found that the Great
often said things so peculiar that I was kept awake in the effort to
discover their meaning. Why, for example, should it be categorically
stated by Lamennais that “si les animaux connaissaient Dieu, ils
parleraient”? What could Cardinal Maury have meant when he said,
“L’éloquence, compagne ordinaire de la liberté [astonishing
generalization!], est inconnue en Angleterre”? These were mysteries
insoluble enough to counteract the soporific effects of such profound
truths as this, discovered, apparently, in 1846 by Monsieur C. H. D.
Duponchel, “Le plus sage mortel est sujet à l’erreur.”

Dr. Legat has found some pleasing quotations on the subject of England
and the English. His selection proves with what fatal ease even the most
intelligent minds are lured into making generalizations about national
character, and how grotesque those generalizations always are.
Montesquieu informs us that “dès que sa fortune se délabre, un anglais
tue ou se fait voleur.” Of the better half of this potential murderer
and robber Balzac says, “La femme anglaise est une pauvre créature
verteuse par force, prête à se dépraver.” “La vanité est l’âme de toute
société anglaise,” says Lamartine. Ledru-Rollin is of opinion that all
the riches of England are “des dépouilles volées aux tombeaux.”

The Goncourts risk a characteristically dashing generalization on the
national characters of England and France: “L’Anglais, filou comme
peuple, est honnête comme individu. Il est le contraire du Français,
honnête comme peuple, et filou comme individu.” If one is going to make
a comparison Voltaire’s is more satisfactory because less pretentious.
Strange are the ways of you Englishmen,

                        qui, des mêmes couteaux,
      Coupez la tête au roi et la queue aux chevaux.
      Nous Français, plus humains, laissons aux rois leurs têtes,
      Et la queue à nos bêtes.

It is unfortunate that history should have vitiated the truth of this
pithy and pregnant statement.

But the bright spots in this enormous tome are rare. After turning over
a few hundred pages one is compelled, albeit reluctantly, to admit that
the Great Thought or Maxim is nearly the most boring form of literature
that exists. Others, it seems, have anticipated me in this grand
discovery. “Las de m’ennuyer des pensées des autres,” says d’Alembert,
“j’ai voulu leur donner les miennes; mais je puis me flatter de leur
avoir rendu tout l’ennui que j’avais reçu d’eux.” Almost next to
d’Alembert’s statement I find this confession from the pen of J. Roux
(1834-1906): “Emettre des pensées, voilà ma consolation, mon délice, ma
vie!” Happy Monsieur Roux!

Turning dissatisfied from Dr. Legat’s anthology of thought, I happened
upon the second number of _Proverbe_, a monthly review, four pages in
length, directed by M. Paul Eluard and counting among its contributors
Tristan Tzara of _Dada_ fame, Messrs. Soupault, Breton and Aragon, the
directors of _Littérature_, M. Picabia, M. Ribemont-Dessaignes and
others of the same kidney. Here, on the front page of the March number
of _Proverbe_, I found the very comment on Great Thoughts for which I
had, in my dissatisfaction, been looking. The following six maxims are
printed one below the other: the first of them is a quotation from the
_Intransigeant_; the other five appear to be the work of M. Tzara, who
appends a footnote to this effect: “Je m’appelle dorénavant
exclusivement Monsieur Paul Bourget.” Here they are:

  Il faut violer les règles, oui, mais pour les violer il faut les
  connaître.

  Il faut régler la connaissance, oui, mais pour la régler il faut la
  violer.

  Il faut connaître les viols, oui, mais pour les connaître il faut les
  régler.

  Il faut connaître les règles, oui, mais pour les connaître il faut les
  violer.

  Il faut régler les viols, oui, mais pour les régler il faut les
  connaître.

  Il faut violer la connaissance, oui, mais pour la violer il faut la
  régler.

It is to be hoped that Dr. Legat will find room for at least a selection
of these profound thoughts in the next edition of his book. “LE passé et
LA pensée n’existent pas,” affirms M. Raymond Duncan on another page of
_Proverbe_. It is precisely after taking too large a dose of “Pensées
sur la Science, la Guerre et sur des sujets très variés” that one half
wishes the statement were in fact true.




                          XVIII: ADVERTISEMENT


I have always been interested in the subtleties of literary form. This
preoccupation with the outward husk, with the letter of literature, is,
I dare say, the sign of a fundamental spiritual impotence. Gigadibs, the
literary man, can understand the tricks of the trade; but when it is a
question, not of conjuring, but of miracles, he is no more effective
than Mr. Sludge. Still, conjuring is amusing to watch and to practise;
an interest in the machinery of the art requires no further
justification. I have dallied with many literary forms, taking pleasure
in their different intricacies, studying the means by which great
authors of the past have resolved the technical problems presented by
each. Sometimes I have even tried my hand at solving the problems
myself—delightful and salubrious exercise for the mind. And now I have
discovered the most exciting, the most arduous literary form of all, the
most difficult to master, the most pregnant in curious possibilities. I
mean the advertisement.

Nobody who has not tried to write an advertisement has any idea of the
delights and difficulties presented by this form of literature—or shall
I say of “applied literature,” for the sake of those who still believe
in the romantic superiority of the pure, the disinterested, over the
immediately useful? The problem that confronts the writer of
advertisements is an immensely complicated one, and by reason of its
very arduousness immensely interesting. It is far easier to write ten
passably effective Sonnets, good enough to take in the not too inquiring
critic, than one effective advertisement that will take in a few
thousand of the uncritical buying public. The problem presented by the
Sonnet is child’s play compared with the problem of the advertisement.
In writing a Sonnet one need think only of oneself. If one’s readers
find one boring or obscure, so much the worse for them. But in writing
an advertisement one must think of other people. Advertisement writers
may not be lyrical, or obscure, or in any way esoteric. They must be
universally intelligible. A good advertisement has this in common with
drama and oratory, that it must be immediately comprehensible and
directly moving. But at the same time it must possess all the
succinctness of epigram.

The orator and the dramatist have “world enough and time” to produce
their effects by cumulative appeals; they can turn all round their
subject, they can repeat; between the heights of their eloquence they
can gracefully practise the art of sinking, knowing that a period of
flatness will only set off the splendour of their impassioned moments.
But the advertiser has no space to spare; he pays too dearly for every
inch. He must play upon the minds of his audience with a small and
limited instrument. He must persuade them to part with their money in a
speech that is no longer than many a lyric by Herrick. Could any problem
be more fascinatingly difficult? No one should be allowed to talk about
the _mot juste_ or the polishing of style who has not tried his hand at
writing an advertisement of something which the public does not want,
but which it must be persuaded into buying. Your _boniment_ must not
exceed a poor hundred and fifty or two hundred words. With what care you
must weigh every syllable! What infinite pains must be taken to fashion
every phrase into a barbed hook that shall stick in the reader’s mind
and draw from its hiding-place within his pocket the reluctant coin!
One’s style and ideas must be lucid and simple enough to be understood
by all; but at the same time, they must not be vulgar. Elegance and an
economical distinction are required; but any trace of literariness in an
advertisement is fatal to its success.

I do not know whether any one has yet written a history of advertising.
If the book does not already exist it will certainly have to be written.
The story of the development of advertising from its infancy in the
early nineteenth century to its luxuriant maturity in the twentieth is
an essential chapter in the history of democracy. Advertisement begins
abjectly, crawling on its belly like the serpent after the primal curse.
Its abjection is the oily humbleness of the shopkeeper in an
oligarchical society. Those nauseating references to the nobility and
clergy, which are the very staple of early advertisements, are only
possible in an age when the aristocracy and its established Church
effectively ruled the land. The custom of invoking these powers lingered
on long after they had ceased to hold sway. It is now, I fancy, almost
wholly extinct. It may be that certain old-fashioned girls’ schools
still provide education for the daughters of the nobility and clergy;
but I am inclined to doubt it. Advertisers still find it worth while to
parade the names and escutcheons of kings. But anything less than
royalty is, frankly, a “wash-out.”

The crawling style of advertisement with its mixture of humble appeals
to patrons and its hyperbolical laudation of the goods advertised, was
early varied by the pseudo-scientific style, a simple development of the
quack’s patter at the fair. Balzacians will remember the advertisement
composed by Finot and the Illustrious Gaudissard for César Birotteau’s
“Huile Céphalique.” The type is not yet dead; we still see
advertisements of substances “based on the principles established by the
Academy of Sciences,” substances known “to the ancients, the Romans, the
Greeks and the nations of the North,” but lost and only rediscovered by
the advertiser. The style and manner of these advertisements belonging
to the early and middle periods of the Age of Advertisement continue to
bear the imprint of the once despicable position of commerce. They are
written with the impossible and insincere unctuousness of tradesmen’s
letters. They are horribly uncultured; and when their writers aspire to
something more ambitious than the counting-house style, they fall at
once into the stilted verbiage of self-taught learning. Some of the
earlier efforts to raise the tone Of advertisements are very curious.
One remembers those remarkable full-page advertisements of Eno’s Fruit
Salt, loaded with weighty apophthegms from Emerson, Epictetus, Zeno the
Eleatic, Pomponazzi, Slawkenbergius and other founts of human wisdom.
There was noble reading on these strange pages. But they shared with
sermons the defect of being a little dull.

The art of advertisement writing has flowered with democracy. The lords
of industry and commerce came gradually to understand that the right way
to appeal to the Free Peoples of the World was familiarly, in an honest
man-to-man style. They perceived that exaggeration and hyperbole do not
really pay, that charlatanry must at least have an air of sincerity.
They confided in the public, they appealed to its intelligence in every
kind of flattering way. The technique of the art became at once
immensely more difficult than it had ever been before, until now the
advertisement is, as I have already hinted, one of the most interesting
and difficult of modern literary forms. Its potentialities are not yet
half explored. Already the most interesting and, in some cases, the only
readable part of most American periodicals is the advertisement section.
What does the future hold in store?




                         XIX: EUPHUES REDIVIVUS


I have recently been fortunate in securing a copy of that very rare and
precious novel _Delina Delaney_, by Amanda M. Ros, authoress of _Irene
Iddesleigh_ and _Poems of Puncture_. Mrs. Ros’s name is only known to a
small and select band of readers. But by these few she is highly prized;
one of her readers, it is said, actually was at the pains to make a
complete manuscript copy of _Delina Delaney_, so great was his
admiration and so hopelessly out of print the book. Let me recommend the
volume, Mrs. Ros’s masterpiece, to the attention of enterprising
publishers.

_Delina Delaney_ opens with a tremendous, an almost, in its richness of
vituperative eloquence, Rabelaisian denunciation of Mr. Barry Pain, who
had, it seems, treated _Irene Iddesleigh_ with scant respect in his
review of the novel in _Black and White_. “This so-called Barry Pain, by
name, has taken upon himself to criticize a work, the depth of which
fails to reach the solving power of his borrowed, and, he’d have you
believe, varied talent.” But “I care not for the opinion of half-starved
upstarts, who don the garb of a shabby-genteel, and fain would feed the
mind of the people with the worthless scraps of stolen fancies.” So
perish all reviewers! And now for Delina herself.

The story is a simple one. Delina Delaney, daughter of a fisherman,
loves and is loved by Lord Gifford. The baleful influence of a
dark-haired Frenchwoman, Madame de Maine, daughter of the Count-av-Nevo,
comes between the lovers and their happiness, and Delina undergoes
fearful torments, including three years’ penal servitude, before their
union can take place. It is the manner, rather than the matter, of the
book which is remarkable. Here, for instance, is a fine conversation
between Lord Gifford and his mother, an aristocratic dame who
strenuously objects to his connection with Delina. Returning one day to
Columba Castle she hears an unpleasant piece of news: her son has been
seen kissing Delina in the conservatory.

  “Home again, mother?” he boldly uttered, as he gazed reverently in her
  face.

  “Home to Hades!” returned the raging high-bred daughter of
  distinguished effeminacy.

  “Ah me! what is the matter?” meekly inquired his lordship.

  “Everything is the matter with a broken-hearted mother of low-minded
  offspring,” she answered hotly.... “Henry Edward Ludlow Gifford, son
  of my strength, idolized remnant of my inert husband, who at this
  moment invisibly offers the scourging whip of fatherly authority to
  your backbone of resentment (though for years you think him dead to
  your movements) and pillar of maternal trust.”

Poor Lady Gifford! her son’s behaviour was her undoing. The shock caused
her to lose first her reason and then her life. Her son was heart-broken
at the thought that he was responsible for her downfall:

  “Is it true, O Death,” I cried in my agony, “that you have wrested
  from me my mother, Lady Gifford of Columba Castle, and left me here, a
  unit figuring on the great blackboard of the past, the shaky surface
  of the present and fickle field of the future to track my life-steps,
  with gross indifference to her wished-for wish?”... Blind she lay to
  the presence of her son, who charged her death-gun with the powder of
  accelerated wrath.

It is impossible to suppose that Mrs. Ros can ever have read _Euphues_
or the earlier romances of Robert Greene. How then shall we account for
the extraordinary resemblance to Euphuism of her style? how explain
those rich alliterations, those elaborate “kennings” and circumlocutions
of which the fabric of her book is woven? Take away from Lyly his
erudition and his passion for antithesis, and you have Mrs. Ros. Delina
is own sister to Euphues and Pandosto. The fact is that Mrs. Ros
happens, though separated from Euphuism by three hundred years and more,
to have arrived independently at precisely the same stage of development
as Lyly and his disciples. It is possible to see in a growing child a
picture in miniature of all the phases through which humanity has passed
in its development. And, in the same way, the mind of an individual
(especially when that individual has been isolated from the main current
of contemporary thought) may climb, alone, to a point at which, in the
past, a whole generation has rested. In Mrs. Ros we see, as we see in
the Elizabethan novelists, the result of the discovery of art by an
unsophisticated mind and of its first conscious attempt to produce the
artistic. It is remarkable how late in the history of every literature
simplicity is invented. The first attempts of any people to be
consciously literary are always productive of the most elaborate
artificiality. Poetry is always written before prose and always in a
language as remote as possible from the language of ordinary life. The
language and versification of “Beowulf” are far more artificial and
remote from life than those of, say, _The Rape of the Lock_. The
Euphuists were not barbarians making their first discovery of
literature; they were, on the contrary, highly educated. But in one
thing they were unsophisticated: they were discovering prose. They were
realizing that prose could be written with art, and they wrote it as
artificially as they possibly could, just as their Saxon ancestors wrote
poetry. They became intoxicated with their discovery of artifice. It was
some time before the intoxication wore off and men saw that art was
possible without artifice. Mrs. Ros, an Elizabethan born out of her
time, is still under the spell of that magical and delicious
intoxication.

Mrs. Ros’s artifices are often more remarkable and elaborate even than
Lyly’s. This is how she tells us that Delina earned money by doing
needlework:

  She tried hard to keep herself a stranger to her poor old father’s
  slight income by the use of the finest production of steel, whose
  blunt edge eyed the reely covering with marked greed, and offered its
  sharp dart to faultless fabrics of flaxen fineness.

And Lord Gifford parts from Delina in these words:

  I am just in time to hear the toll of a parting bell strike its heavy
  weight of appalling softness against the weakest fibres of a heart of
  love, arousing and tickling its dormant action, thrusting the dart of
  evident separation deeper into its tubes of tenderness, and fanning
  the flame, already unextinguishable, into volumes of burning blaze.

But more often Mrs. Ros does not exceed the bounds which Lyly set for
himself. Here, for instance, is a sentence that might have come direct
out of _Euphues_:

  Two days after, she quit Columba Castle and resolved to enter the holy
  cloisters of a convent, where, she believed she’d be dead to the built
  hopes of wealthy worth, the crooked steps to worldly distinction, and
  the designing creaks [_sic_] in the muddy stream of love.

Or again, this description of the artful charmers who flaunt along the
streets of London is written in the very spirit and language of
_Euphues_:

  Their hair was a light-golden colour, thickly fringed in front, hiding
  in many cases the furrows of a life of vice; behind, reared coils,
  some of which differed in hue, exhibiting the fact that they were on
  patrol for the price of another supply of dye.... The elegance of
  their attire had the glow of robbery—the rustle of many a lady’s
  silent curse. These tools of brazen effrontery were strangers to the
  blush of innocence that tinged many a cheek, as they would gather
  round some of God’s ordained, praying in flowery words of decoying
  Cockney, that they should break their holy vows by accompanying them
  to the halls of adultery. Nothing daunted at the staunch refusal of
  different divines, whose modest walk was interrupted by their bold
  assertion of loathsome rights, they moved on, while laughs of hidden
  rage and defeat flitted across their doll-decked faces, to die as they
  next accosted some rustic-looking critics, who, tempted with their
  polished twang, their earnest advances, their pitiful entreaties,
  yielded, in their ignorance of the ways of a large city, to their
  glossy offers, and accompanied, with slight hesitation, these
  artificial shells of immorality to their homes of ruin, degradation
  and shame.




                 XX: THE AUTHOR OF _EMINENT VICTORIANS_


A superlatively civilized Red Indian living apart from the vulgar world
in an elegant and park-like reservation, Mr. Strachey rarely looks over
his walls at the surrounding country. It seethes, he knows, with crowds
of horribly colonial persons. Like the hosts of Midian, the innumerable
“poor whites” prowl and prowl around, but the noble savage pays no
attention to them.

In his spiritual home—a neat and commodious Georgian mansion in the
style of Leoni or Ware—he sits and reads, he turns over portfolios of
queer old prints, he savours meditatively the literary vintages of
centuries. And occasionally, once in two or three years, he tosses over
his park palings a record of these leisured degustations, a judgment
passed upon his library, a ripe rare book. One time it is Eminent
Victorians; the next it is Queen Victoria herself. To-day he has given
us a miscellaneous collection of _Books and Characters_.

If Voltaire had lived to the age of two hundred and thirty instead of
shuffling off at a paltry eighty-four, he would have written about the
Victorian epoch, about life and letters at large, very much as Mr.
Strachey has written. That lucid common sense, that sharp illuminating
wit which delight us in the writings of the middle eighteenth
century—these are Mr. Strachey’s characteristics. We know exactly what
he would have been if he had come into the world at the beginning of the
seventeen hundreds; if he is different from the men of that date it is
because he happens to have been born towards the end of the eighteens.

The sum of knowledge at the disposal of the old Encyclopædists was
singularly small, compared, that is to say, with the knowledge which we
of the twentieth century have inherited. They made mistakes and in their
ignorance they passed what we can see to have been hasty and very
imperfect judgments on men and things. Mr. Strachey is the eighteenth
century grown-up; he is Voltaire at two hundred and thirty.

Voltaire at sixty would have treated the Victorian era, if it could have
appeared in a prophetical vision before his eyes, in terms of “La
Pucelle”—with ribaldry. He would have had to be much older in knowledge
and inherited experience before he could have approached it in that
spirit of sympathetic irony and ironical sympathy which Mr. Strachey
brings to bear upon it. Mr. Strachey makes us like the old Queen, while
we smile at her; he makes us admire the Prince Consort in spite of the
portentous priggishness—duly insisted on in the biography—which
accompanied his intelligence. With all the untutored barbarity of their
notions, Gordon and Florence Nightingale are presented to us as
sympathetic figures. Their peculiar brand of religion and ethics might
be absurd, but their characters are shown to be interesting and fine.

It is only in the case of Dr. Arnold that Mr. Strachey permits himself
to be unrestrainedly Voltairean; he becomes a hundred and seventy years
younger as he describes the founder of the modern Public School system.
The irony of that description is tempered by no sympathy. To make the
man appear even more ridiculous, Mr. Strachey adds a stroke or two to
the portrait of his own contriving—little inventions which deepen the
absurdity of the caricature. Thus we read that Arnold’s “outward
appearance was the index of his inward character. The legs, perhaps,
were shorter than they should have been; but the sturdy athletic frame,
especially when it was swathed (as it usually was) in the flowing robes
of a Doctor of Divinity, was full of an imposing vigour.” How
exquisitely right those short legs are! how artistically inevitable! Our
admiration for Mr. Strachey’s art is only increased when we discover
that in attributing to the Doctor this brevity of shank he is justified
by no contemporary document. The short legs are his own contribution.

Voltaire, then, at two hundred and thirty has learned sympathy. He has
learned that there are other ways of envisaging life than the
common-sense, reasonable way and that people with a crack-brained view
of the universe have a right to be judged as human beings and must not
be condemned out of hand as lunatics or obscurantists. Blake and St.
Francis have as much right to their place in the sun as Gibbon and Hume.
But still, in spite of this lesson, learned and inherited from the
nineteenth century, our Voltaire of eleven score years and ten still
shows a marked preference for the Gibbons and the Humes; he still
understands their attitude towards life a great deal better than he
understands the other fellow’s attitude.

In his new volume of _Books and Characters_ Mr. Strachey prints an essay
on Blake (written, it may be added parenthetically, some sixteen years
ago), in which he sets out very conscientiously to give that disquieting
poet his due. The essay is interesting, not because it contains anything
particularly novel in the way of criticism, but because it reveals, in
spite of all Mr. Strachey’s efforts to overcome it, in spite of his
admiration for the great artist in Blake, his profound antagonism
towards Blake’s view of life.

He cannot swallow mysticism; he finds it clearly very difficult to
understand what all this fuss about the soul really signifies. The man
who believes in the absoluteness of good and evil, who sees the universe
as a spiritual entity concerned, in some transcendental fashion, with
morality, the man who regards the human spirit as possessing a somehow
cosmic importance and significance—ah no, decidedly no, even at two
hundred and thirty Voltaire cannot whole-heartedly sympathize with such
a man.

And that, no doubt, is the reason why Mr. Strachey has generally shrunk
from dealing, in his biographies and his criticisms, with any of these
strange incomprehensible characters. Blake is the only one he had tried
his hand on, and the result is not entirely satisfactory. He is more at
home with the Gibbons and Humes of this world, and when he is not
discussing the reasonable beings he likes to amuse himself with the
eccentrics, like Mr. Creevey or Lady Hester Stanhope. The portentous,
formidable mystics he leaves severely alone.

One cannot imagine Mr. Strachey coping with Dostoevsky or with any of
the other great explorers of the soul. One cannot imagine him writing a
life of Beethoven. These huge beings are disquieting for a Voltaire who
has learned enough sympathy to be able to recognize their greatness, but
whose temperament still remains unalterably alien. Mr. Strachey is wise
to have nothing to do with them.

The second-rate mystics (I use the term in its widest and vaguest
sense), the men who believe in the spirituality of the universe and in
the queerer dogmas which have become tangled in that belief, without
possessing the genius which alone can justify such notions in the eyes
of the Voltaireans—these are the objects on which Mr. Strachey likes to
turn his calm and penetrating gaze. Gordon and Florence Nightingale, the
Prince Consort, Clough—they and their beliefs are made to look rather
absurd by the time he has done with them. He reduces their spiritual
struggles to a series of the most comically futile series of gymnastics
in the void. The men of genius who have gone through the same spiritual
struggles, who have believed the same sort of creeds, have had the
unanswerable justification of their genius. These poor absurd creatures
have not. Voltaire in his third century gives them a certain amount of
his newly learned sympathy; but he also gives them a pretty strong dose
of his old irony.




                         XXI: EDWARD THOMAS[1]


The poetry of Edward Thomas affects one morally as well as æsthetically
and intellectually. We have grown rather shy, in these days of pure
æstheticism, of speaking of those consoling or strengthening qualities
of poetry on which critics of another generation took pleasure in
dwelling. Thomas’s poetry is strengthening and consoling, not because it
justifies God’s ways to man or whispers of reunions beyond the grave,
not because it presents great moral truths in memorable numbers, but in
a more subtle and very much more effective way. Walking through the
streets on these September nights, one notices, wherever there are trees
along the street and lamps close beside the trees, a curious and
beautiful phenomenon. The light of the street lamps striking up into the
trees has power to make the grimed, shabby, and tattered foliage of the
all-but autumn seem brilliantly and transparently green. Within the
magic circle of the light the tree seems to be at that crowning moment
of the spring when the leaves are fully grown, but still luminous with
youth and seemingly almost immaterial in their lightness. Thomas’s
poetry is to the mind what that transfiguring lamplight is to the tired
trees. On minds grown weary in the midst of the intolerable turmoil and
aridity of daily wage-earning existence, it falls with a touch of
momentary rejuvenation.

The secret of Thomas’s influence lies in the fact that he is genuinely
what so many others of our time quite unjustifiably claim to be, a
nature poet. To be a nature poet it is not enough to affirm vaguely that
God made the country and man made the town, it is not enough to talk
sympathetically about familiar rural objects, it is not enough to be
sonorously poetical about mountains and trees; it is not even enough to
speak of these things with the precision of real knowledge and love. To
be a nature poet a man must have felt profoundly and intimately those
peculiar emotions which nature can inspire, and must be able to express
them in such a way that his reader feels them. The real difficulty that
confronts the would-be poet of nature is that these emotions are of all
emotions the most difficult to pin down and analyze, and the hardest of
all to convey. In “October” Thomas describes what is surely the
characteristic emotion induced by a contact with nature—a kind of
exultant melancholy which is the nearest approach to quiet unpassionate
happiness that the soul can know. Happiness of whatever sort is
extraordinarily hard to analyze and describe. One can think of a hundred
poems, plays, and novels that deal exhaustively with pain and misery to
one that is an analysis and an infectious description of happiness.
Passionate joy is more easily recapturable in art; it is dramatic,
vehemently defined. But quiet happiness, which is at the same time a
kind of melancholy—there you have an emotion which is inexpressible
except by a mind gifted with a diversity of rarely combined qualities.
The poet who would sing of this happiness must combine a rare
penetration with a rare candour and honesty of mind. A man who feels an
emotion that is very difficult to express is often tempted to describe
it in terms of something entirely different. Platonist poets feel a
powerful emotion when confronted by beauty, and, finding it a matter of
the greatest difficulty to say precisely what that emotion is in itself,
proceed to describe it in terms of theology which has nothing whatever
to do with the matter in point. Groping after an expression of the
emotions aroused in him by the contemplation of nature, Wordsworth
sometimes stumbles doubtfully along philosophical byways that are at the
best parallel to the direct road for which he is seeking. Everywhere in
literature this difficulty in finding an expression for any undramatic,
ill-defined emotion is constantly made apparent.

Thomas’s limpid honesty of mind saves him from the temptation to which
so many others succumb, the temptation to express one thing, because it
is with difficulty describable, in terms of something else. He never
philosophizes the emotions which he feels in the presence of nature and
beauty, but presents them as they stand, transmitting them directly to
his readers without the interposition of any obscuring medium. Rather
than attempt to explain the emotion, to rationalize it into something
that it is not, he will present it for what it is, a problem of which he
does not know the solution. In “Tears” we have an example of this candid
confession of ignorance:

        It seems I have no tears left. They should have fallen—
        Their ghosts, if tears have ghosts, did fall—that day
        When twenty hounds streamed by me, not yet combed out
        But still all equals in their age of gladness
        Upon the scent, made one, like a great dragon
        In Blooming Meadow that bends towards the sun
        And once bore hops: and on that other day
        When I stepped out from the double-shadowed Tower
        Into an April morning, stirring and sweet
        And warm. Strange solitude was there and silence.
        A mightier charm than any in the Tower
        Possessed the courtyard. They were changing guard,
        Soldiers in line, young English countrymen,
        Fair-haired and ruddy, in white tunics. Drums
        And fifes were playing “The British Grenadiers.”
        The men, the music piercing that solitude
        And silence, told me truths I had not dreamed,
        And have forgotten since their beauty passed.

The emotion is nameless and indescribable, but the poet has intensely
felt it and transmitted it to us who read his poem, so that we, too,
feel it with the same intensity. Different aspects of this same nameless
emotion of quiet happiness shot with melancholy are the theme of almost
all Thomas’s poems. They bring to us precisely that consolation and
strength which the country and solitude and leisure bring to the spirits
of those long pent in populous cities, but essentialized and distilled
in the form of art. They are the light that makes young again the
tattered leaves.

Of the purely æsthetic qualities of Thomas’s poetry it is unnecessary to
say much. He devised a curiously bare and candid verse to express with
all possible simplicity and clarity his clear sensations and
emotions.... “This is not,” as Mr. de la Mare says in his foreword to
Thomas’s _Collected Poems_, “this is not a poetry that will drug or
intoxicate.... It must be read slowly, as naturally as if it were prose,
without emphasis.” With this bare verse, devoid of any affectation,
whether of cleverness or a too great simplicity, Thomas could do all
that he wanted. See, for example, with what extraordinary brightness and
precision he could paint a picture:

               Lichen, ivy and moss
               Keep evergreen the trees
               That stand half flayed and dying,
               And the dead trees on their knees
               In dog’s mercury and moss:
               And the bright twit of the goldfinch drops
               Down there as he flits on thistle-tops.

The same bare precision served him well for describing the interplay of
emotions, as in “After you Speak” or “Like the Touch of Rain.” And with
this verse of his he could also chant the praises of his English
countryside and the character of its people, as typified in
Lob-lie-by-the-fire:

            He has been in England as long as dove and daw,
            Calling the wild cherry tree the merry tree,
            The rose campion Bridget-in-her-bravery;
            And in a tender mood he, as I guess,
            Christened one flower Love-in-idleness....




                    XXII: A WORDSWORTH ANTHOLOGY[2]


To regard Wordsworth critically, impersonally, is for some of us a
rather difficult matter. With the disintegration of the solid
orthodoxies Wordsworth became for many intelligent, liberal-minded
families the Bible of that sort of pantheism, that dim faith in the
existence of a spiritual world, which filled, somewhat inadequately, the
place of the older dogmas. Brought up as children in the Wordsworthian
tradition, we were taught to believe that a Sunday walk among the hills
was somehow equivalent to church-going: the First Lesson was to be read
among the clouds, the Second in the primroses; the birds and the running
waters sang hymns, and the whole blue landscape preached a sermon “of
moral evil and of good.” From this dim religious education we brought
away a not very well-informed veneration for the name of Wordsworth, a
dutiful conviction about the spirituality of Nature in general, and an
extraordinary superstition about mountains in particular—a superstition
that it took at least three seasons of Alpine Sports to dissipate
entirely. Consequently, on reaching man’s estate, when we actually came
to read our Wordsworth, we found it extremely difficult to appraise his
greatness, so many veils of preconceived ideas had to be pushed aside,
so many inveterate deflections of vision allowed for. However, it became
possible at last to look at Wordsworth as a detached phenomenon in the
world of ideas and not as part of the family tradition of childhood.

Like many philosophers, and especially philosophers of a mystical tinge
of thought, Wordsworth based his philosophy on his emotions. The
conversion of emotions into intellectual terms is a process that has
been repeated a thousand times in the history of the human mind. We feel
a powerful emotion before a work of art, therefore it partakes of the
divine, is a reconstruction of the Idea of which the natural object is a
poor reflection. Love moves us deeply, therefore human love is a type of
divine love. Nature in her various aspects inspires us with fear, joy,
contentment, despair, therefore nature is a soul that expresses anger,
sympathy, love, and hatred. One could go on indefinitely multiplying
examples of the way in which man objectifies the kingdoms of heaven and
hell that are within him. The process is often a dangerous one. The
mystic who feels within himself the stirrings of inenarrable emotions is
not content with these emotions as they are in themselves. He feels it
necessary to invent a whole cosmogony that will account for them. To him
this philosophy will be true, in so far as it is an expression in
intellectual terms of these emotions. But to those who do not know these
emotions at first hand, it will be simply misleading. The mystical
emotions have what may be termed a conduct value; they enable the man
who feels them to live his life with a serenity and confidence unknown
to other men. But the philosophical terms in which these emotions are
expressed have not necessarily any truth value. This mystical philosophy
will be valuable only in so far as it revives, in the minds of its
students, those conduct-affecting emotions which originally gave it
birth. Accepted at its intellectual face value, such a philosophy may
not only have no worth; it may be actually harmful.

Into this beautifully printed volume Mr. Cobden-Sanderson has gathered
together most of the passages in Wordsworth’s poetry which possess the
power of reviving the emotions that inspired them. It is astonishing to
find that they fill the best part of two hundred and fifty pages, and
that there are still plenty of poems—“Peter Bell,” for example—that one
would like to see included. “The Prelude” and “Excursion” yield a rich
tribute of what our ancestors would have called “beauties.” There is
that astonishing passage in which the poet describes how, as a boy, he
rowed by moonlight across the lake:

           And, as I rose upon the stroke, my boat
           Went heaving through the water like a swan;
           When, from behind that craggy steep till then
           The horizon’s bound, a huge peak, black and huge,
           As if with voluntary power instinct,
           Upreared its head. I struck and struck again,
           And growing still in stature the grim shape
           Towered up between me and the stars, and still,
           For so it seemed, with purpose of its own
           And measured motion, like a living thing,
           Strode after me.

There is the history of that other fearful moment when

               I heard among the solitary hills
               Low breathings coming after me, and sounds
               Of undistinguishable motion, steps
               Almost as silent as the turf they trod.

And there are other passages telling of nature in less awful and
menacing aspects, nature the giver of comfort and strong serenity.
Reading these we are able in some measure to live for ourselves the
emotions that were Wordsworth’s. If we can feel his “shadowy
exaltations,” we have got all that Wordsworth can give us. There is no
need to read the theology of his mysticism, the pantheistic explanation
of his emotions. To Peter Bell a primrose by a river’s brim was only a
yellow primrose. Its beauty stirred in him no feeling. But one can be
moved by the sight of the primrose without necessarily thinking, in the
words of Mr. Cobden-Sanderson’s preface, of “the infinite tenderness of
the infinitely great, of the infinitely great which, from out the
infinite and amid its own stupendous tasks, stoops to strew the path of
man, the infinitely little, with sunshine and with flowers.” This is the
theology of our primrose emotion. But it is the emotion itself which is
important, not the theology. The emotion has its own powerful conduct
value, whereas the philosophy derived from it, suspiciously
anthropocentric, possesses, we should imagine, only the smallest value
as truth.




                            XXIII: VERHAEREN


Verhaeren was one of those men who feel all their life long “l’envie”
(to use his own admirably expressive phrase), “l’envie de tailler en
drapeaux l’étoffe de la vie.” The stuff of life can be put to worse
uses. To cut it into flags is, on the whole, more admirable than to cut
it, shall we say, into cerecloths, or money-bags, or Parisian
underclothing. A flag is a brave, a cheerful and a noble object. These
are qualities for which we are prepared to forgive the flag its
over-emphasis, its lack of subtlety, its touch of childishness. One can
think of a number of writers who have marched through literary history
like an army with banners. There was Victor Hugo, for example—one of
Verhaeren’s admired masters. There was Balzac, to whose views of life
Verhaeren’s was, in some points, curiously akin. Among the minor makers
of oriflammes there is our own Mr. Chesterton, with his heroic air of
being for ever on the point of setting out on a crusade, glorious with
bunting and mounted on a rocking-horse.

The flag-maker is a man of energy and strong vitality. He likes to
imagine that all that surrounds him is as large, as full of sap and as
vigorous as he feels himself to be. He pictures the world as a place
where the colours are strong and brightly contrasted, where a vigorous
chiaroscuro leaves no doubt as to the true nature of light and darkness,
and where all life pulsates, quivering and taut, like a banner in the
wind. From the first we find in Verhaeren all the characteristics of the
tailor of banners. In his earliest book of verse, _Les Flamands_, we see
him already delighting in such lines as

        Leurs deux poings monstrueux pataugeaient dans la pâte.

Already too we find him making copious use—or was it abuse?—as Victor
Hugo had done before him, of words like “vaste,” “énorme,” “infini,”
“infiniment,” “infinité,” “univers.” Thus, in “L’Ame de la Ville,” he
talks of an “énorme” viaduct, an “immense” train, a “monstrueux” sun,
even of the “énorme” atmosphere. For Verhaeren all roads lead to the
infinite, wherever and whatever that may be.

             Les grand’routes tracent des croix
             A l’infini, à travers bois;
             Les grand’routes tracent des croix lointaines
             A l’infini, à travers plaines.

Infinity is one of those notions which are not to be lightly played
with. The makers of flags like it because it can be contrasted so
effectively with the microscopic finitude of man. Writers like Hugo and
Verhaeren talk so often and so easily about infinity that the idea
ceases in their poetry to have any meaning at all.

I have said that, in certain respects, Verhaeren, in his view of life,
is not unlike Balzac. This resemblance is most marked in some of the
poems of his middle period, especially those in which he deals with
aspects of contemporary life. _Les Villes tentaculaires_ contains poems
which are wholly Balzacian in conception. Take, for example, Verhaeren’s
rhapsody on the Stock Exchange:

        Une fureur réenflammée
        Au mirage du moindre espoir
        Monte soudain de l’entonnoir
        De bruit et de fumée,
        Où l’on se bat, à coups de vols, en bas.
        Langues sèches, regards aigus, gestes inverses,
        Et cervelles, qu’en tourbillons les millions traversent,
        Echangent là leur peur et leur terreur ...
        Aux fins de mois, quand les débâcles se décident
        La mort les paraphe de suicides,
        Mais au jour même aux heures blêmes,
        Les volontés dans la fièvre revivent,
        L’acharnement sournois
        Reprend comme autrefois.

One cannot read these lines without thinking of Balzac’s feverish
money-makers, of the Baron de Nucingen, Du Tillet, the Kellers and all
the lesser misers and usurers, and all their victims. With their
worked-up and rather melodramatic excitement, they breathe the very
spirit of Balzac’s prodigious film-scenario version of life.

Verhaeren’s flag-making instinct led him to take special delight in all
that is more than ordinarily large and strenuous. He extols and
magnifies the gross violence of the Flemish peasantry, their almost
infinite capacity for taking food and drink, their industry, their
animalism. In true Rooseveltian style, he admired energy for its own
sake. All his romping rhythms were dictated to him by the need to
express this passion for the strenuous. His curious assonances and
alliterations—

                 Luttent et s’entrebuttent en disputes—

arise from this same desire to recapture the sense of violence and
immediate life.

It is interesting to compare the violence and energy of Verhaeren with
the violence of an earlier poet—Rimbaud, the marvellous boy, if ever
there was one. Rimbaud cut the stuff of life into flags, but into flags
that never fluttered on this earth. His violence penetrated, in some
sort, beyond the bounds of ordinary life. In some of his poems Rimbaud
seems actually to have reached the nameless goal towards which he was
striving, to have arrived at that world of unheard-of spiritual vigour
and beauty whose nature he can only describe in an exclamatory metaphor:

               Millions d’oiseaux d’or, ô future vigueur!

But the vigour of Verhaeren is never anything so fine and spiritual as
this “million of golden birds.” It is merely the vigour and violence of
ordinary life speeded up to cinema intensity.

It is a noticeable fact that Verhaeren was generally at his best when he
took a holiday from the making and waving of flags. His Flemish bucolics
and the love poems of _Les Heures_, written for the most part in
traditional form, and for the most part shorter and more concentrated
than his poems of violence and energy, remain the most moving portion of
his work. Very interesting, too, are the poems belonging to that early
phase of doubt and depression which saw the publication of _Les
Débâcles_ and _Les Flambeaux Noirs_. The energy and life of the later
books is there, but in some sort concentrated, preserved and
intensified, because turned inwards upon itself. Of many of the later
poems one feels that they were written much too easily. These must have
been brought very painfully and laboriously to the birth.




                           XXIV: EDWARD LEAR


There are few writers whose works I care to read more than once, and one
of them is certainly Edward Lear. Nonsense, like poetry, to which it is
closely allied, like philosophic speculation, like every product of the
imagination, is an assertion of man’s spiritual freedom in spite of all
the oppression of circumstance. As long as it remains possible for the
human mind to invent the Quangle Wangle and the Fimble Fowl, to wander
at will over the Great Gromboolian Plain and the hills of the Cnankly
Bore, the victory is ours. The existence of nonsense is the nearest
approach to a proof of that improvable article of faith, whose truth we
must all assume or perish miserably: that life is worth living. It is
when circumstances combine to prove, with syllogistic cogency, that life
is not worth living that I turn to Lear and find comfort and
refreshment. I read him and I perceive that it is a good thing to be
alive; for I am free, with Lear, to be as inconsequent as I like.

Lear is a genuine poet. For what is his nonsense except the poetical
imagination a little twisted out of its course? Lear had the true poet’s
feeling for words—words in themselves, precious and melodious, like
phrases of music; personal as human beings. Marlowe talks of
entertaining divine Zenocrate; Milton of the leaves that fall in
Vallombrosa; Lear of the Fimble Fowl with a corkscrew leg, of runcible
spoons, of things meloobious and genteel. Lewis Carroll wrote nonsense
by exaggerating sense—a too logical logic. His coinages of words are
intellectual. Lear, more characteristically a poet, wrote nonsense that
is an excess of imagination, coined words for the sake of their colour
and sound alone. His is the purer nonsense, because more poetical.
Change the key ever so little and the “Dong with a Luminous Nose” would
be one of the most memorable romantic poems of the nineteenth century.
Think, too, of that exquisite “Yonghy Bonghy Bo”! In one of Tennyson’s
later volumes there is a charming little lyric about Catullus, which
begins:

                  Row us out from Desenzano,
                    To your Sirmione row!
                  So they row’d, and there we landed—
                    _O venusta Sirmio!_

Can one doubt for a moment that he was thinking, when he wrote these
words, of that superb stanza with which the “Yonghy Bonghy” opens:

                    On the coast of Coromandel,
                      Where the early pumpkins blow,
                    In the middle of the woods,
                      Dwelt the Yonghy Bonghy Bo.

Personally, I prefer Lear’s poem; it is the richer and the fuller of the
two.

Lear’s genius is at its best in the Nonsense Rhymes, or Limericks, as a
later generation has learned to call them. In these I like to think of
him not merely as a poet and a draughtsman—and how unique an artist the
recent efforts of Mr. Nash to rival him have only affirmed—but also as a
profound social philosopher. No study of Lear would be complete without
at least a few remarks on “They” of the Nonsense Rhymes. “They” are the
world, the man in the street; “They” are what the leader-writers in the
twopenny press would call all Right-Thinking Men and Women; “They” are
Public Opinion. The Nonsense Rhymes are, for the most part, nothing more
nor less than episodes selected from the history of that eternal
struggle between the genius or the eccentric and his fellow-beings.
Public Opinion universally abhors eccentricity. There was, for example,
that charming Old Man of Melrose who walked on the tips of his toes. But
“They” said (with their usual inability to appreciate the artist), “It
ain’t pleasant to see you at present, you stupid old man of Melrose.”
Occasionally, when the eccentric happens to be a criminal genius, “They”
are doubtless right. The Old Man with a Gong who bumped on it all the
day long deserved to be smashed. (But “They” also smashed a quite
innocuous Old Man of Whitehaven merely for dancing a quadrille with a
raven.) And there was that Old Person of Buda, whose conduct grew ruder
and ruder; “They” were justified, I dare say, in using a hammer to
silence his clamour. But it raises the whole question of punishment and
of the relation between society and the individual.

When “They” are not offensive, they content themselves with being
foolishly inquisitive. Thus, “They” ask the Old Man of the Wrekin
whether his boots are made of leather. “They” pester the Old Man in a
Tree with imbecile questions about the Bee which so horribly bored him.
In these encounters the geniuses and the eccentrics often get the better
of the gross and heavy-witted public. The Old Person of Ware who rode on
the back of a bear certainly scored off “Them.” For when “They” asked:
“Does it trot?” He replied, “It does not.” (The picture shows it
galloping _ventre à terre_.) “It’s a Moppsikon Floppsikon bear.”
Sometimes, too, the eccentric actually leads “Them” on to their
discomfiture. One thinks of that Old Man in a Garden, who always begged
every one’s pardon. When “They” asked him, “What for?” he replied,
“You’re a bore, and I trust you’ll go out of my garden.” But “They”
probably ended up by smashing him.

Occasionally the men of genius adopt a Mallarméen policy. They flee from
the gross besetting crowd.

        La chair est triste, hélas, et j’ai lu tous les livres.
        Fuir, là-bas, fuir....

It was surely with these words on his lips that the Old Person of Bazing
(whose presence of mind, for all that he was a Symbolist, was amazing)
went out to purchase the steed which he rode at full speed and escaped
from the people of Bazing. He chose the better part; for it is almost
impossible to please the mob. The Old Person of Ealing was thought by
his suburban neighbours to be almost devoid of good feeling, because, if
you please, he drove a small gig with three owls and a pig. And there
was that pathetic Old Man of Thermopylæ (for whom I have a peculiar
sympathy, since he reminds me so poignantly of myself), who never did
anything properly. “They,” said, “If you choose to boil eggs in your
shoes, you shall never remain in Thermopylæ.” The sort of people “They”
like do the stupidest things, have the vulgarest accomplishments. Of the
Old Person of Filey his acquaintance was wont to speak highly because he
danced perfectly well to the sound of a bell. And the people of Shoreham
adored that fellow-citizen of theirs whose habits were marked by decorum
and who bought an umbrella and sate in the cellar. Naturally; it was
only to be expected.




                       XXV: SIR CHRISTOPHER WREN


That an Englishman should be a very great plastic artist is always
rather surprising. Perhaps it is a matter of mere chance; perhaps it has
something to do with our national character—if such a thing really
exists. But, whatever may be the cause, the fact remains that England
has produced very few artists of first-class importance. The
Renaissance, as it spread, like some marvellous infectious disease of
the spirit, across the face of Europe, manifested itself in different
countries by different symptoms. In Italy, the country of its origin,
the Renaissance was, more than anything, an outburst of painting,
architecture and sculpture. Scholarship and religious reformation were,
in Germany, the typical manifestations of the disease. But when this
gorgeous spiritual measles crossed the English Channel, its symptoms
were almost exclusively literary. The first premonitory touch of the
infection from Italy “brought out” Chaucer. With the next bout of the
disease England produced the Elizabethans. But among all these poets
there was not a single plastic artist whose name we so much as remember.

And then, suddenly, the seventeenth century gave birth to two English
artists of genius. It produced Inigo Jones and, a little later, Wren.
Wren died, at the age of more than ninety, in the spring of 1723. We are
celebrating to-day his bi-centenary—celebrating it not merely by
antiquarian talk and scholarly appreciations of his style but also (the
signs are not wanting) in a more concrete and living way: by taking a
renewed interest in the art of which he was so great a master and by
reverting in our practice to that fine tradition which he, with his
predecessor, Inigo, inaugurated.

An anniversary celebration is an act of what Wordsworth would have
called “natural piety”; an act by which past is linked with present and
of the vague, interminable series of the days a single comprehensible
and logical unity is created in our minds. At the coming of the
centenaries we like to remember the great men of the past, not so much
by way of historical exercise, but that we may see precisely where, in
relation to their achievement, we stand at the present time, that we may
appraise the life still left in their spirit and apply to ourselves the
moral of their example. I have no intention in this article of giving a
biography of Wren, a list of his works, or a technical account of his
style and methods. I propose to do no more than describe, in the most
general terms, the nature of his achievement and its significance to
ourselves.

Wren was a good architect. But since it is important to know precisely
what we are talking about, let us begin by asking ourselves what good
architecture is. Descending with majesty from his private Sinai, Mr.
Ruskin dictated to a whole generation of Englishmen the æsthetic Law. On
monolithic tables that were the Stones of Venice he wrote the great
truths that had been revealed to him. Here is one of them:

  It is to be generally observed that the proportions of buildings have
  nothing to do with the style or general merit of their architecture.
  An architect trained in the worst schools and utterly devoid of all
  meaning or purpose in his work, may yet have such a natural gift of
  massing and grouping as will render his structure effective when seen
  at a distance.

Now it is to be generally observed, as he himself would say, that in all
matters connected with art, Ruskin is to be interpreted as we interpret
dreams—that is to say, as signifying precisely the opposite of what he
says. Thus, when we find him saying that good architecture has nothing
to do with proportion or the judicious disposition of masses and that
the general effect counts for nothing at all, we may take it as more or
less definitely proven that good architecture is, in fact, almost
entirely a matter of proportion and massing, and that the general effect
of the whole work counts for nearly everything. Interpreted according to
this simple oneirocritical method, Ruskin’s pontifical pronouncement may
be taken as explaining briefly and clearly the secrets of good
architecture. That is why I have chosen this quotation to be the text of
my discourse on Wren.

For the qualities which most obviously distinguish Wren’s work are
precisely those which Ruskin so contemptuously disparages and which we,
by our process of interpretation, have singled out as the essentially
architectural qualities. In all that Wren designed—I am speaking of the
works of his maturity; for at the beginning of his career he was still
an unpractised amateur, and at the end, though still on occasion
wonderfully successful, a very old man—we see a faultless proportion, a
felicitous massing and contrasting of forms. He conceived his buildings
as three-dimensional designs which should be seen, from every point of
view, as harmoniously proportioned wholes. (With regard to the exteriors
this, of course, is true only of those buildings which _can_ be seen
from all sides. Like all true architects, Wren preferred to build in
positions where his work could be appreciated three-dimensionally. But
he was also a wonderful maker of façades; witness his Middle Temple
gateway and his houses in King’s Bench Walk.) He possessed in the
highest degree that instinctive sense of proportion and scale which
enabled him to embody his conception in brick and stone. In his great
masterpiece of St. Paul’s every part of the building, seen from within
or without, seems to stand in a certain satisfying and harmonious
relation to every other part. The same is true even of the smallest
works belonging to the period of Wren’s maturity. On its smaller scale
and different plane, such a building as Rochester Guildhall is as
beautiful, because as harmonious in the relation of all its parts, as
St. Paul’s.

Of Wren’s other purely architectural qualities I shall speak but
briefly. He was, to begin with, an engineer of inexhaustible resource;
one who could always be relied upon to find the best possible solution
to any problem, from blowing up the ruins of old St. Paul’s to providing
the new with a dome that should be at once beautiful and thoroughly
safe. As a designer he exhibited the same practical ingenuity. No
architect has known how to make so much of a difficult site and cheap
materials. The man who built the City churches was a practical genius of
no common order. He was also an artist of profoundly original mind. This
originality reveals itself in the way in which he combines the accepted
features of classical Renaissance architecture into new designs that
were entirely English and his own. The steeples of his City churches
provide us with an obvious example of this originality. His domestic
architecture—that wonderful application of classical principles to the
best in the native tradition—is another.

But Wren’s most characteristic quality—the quality which gives to his
work, over and above its pure beauty, its own peculiar character and
charm—is a quality rather moral than æsthetic. Of Chelsea Hospital,
Carlyle once remarked that it was “obviously the work of a gentleman.”
The words are illuminating. Everything that Wren did was the work of a
gentleman; that is the secret of its peculiar character. For Wren was a
great gentleman: one who valued dignity and restraint and who,
respecting himself, respected also humanity; one who desired that men
and women should live with the dignity, even the grandeur, befitting
their proud human title; one who despised meanness and oddity as much as
vulgar ostentation; one who admired reason and order, who distrusted all
extravagance and excess. A gentleman, the finished product of an old and
ordered civilization.

Wren, the restrained and dignified gentleman, stands out most clearly
when we compare him with his Italian contemporaries. The baroque artists
of the seventeenth century were interested above everything in the new,
the startling, the astonishing; they strained after impossible
grandeurs, unheard-of violences. The architectural ideals of which they
dreamed were more suitable for embodiment in theatrical cardboard than
in stone. And indeed, the late seventeenth and early eighteenth century
was the golden age of scene-painting in Italy. The artists who painted
the settings for the elder Scarlatti’s operas, the later Bibienas and
Piranesis, came nearer to reaching the wild Italian ideal than ever mere
architects like Borromini or Bernini, their imaginations cramped by the
stubbornness of stone and the unsleeping activities of gravitations,
could hope to do.

How vastly different is the baroque theatricality from Wren’s sober
restraint! Wren was a master of the grand style; but he never dreamed of
building for effect alone. He was never theatrical or showy, never
pretentious or vulgar. St. Paul’s is a monument of temperance and
chastity. His great palace at Hampton Court is no gaudy stage-setting
for the farce of absolute monarchy. It is a country gentleman’s
house—more spacious, of course, and with statelier rooms and more
impressive vistas—but still a house meant to be lived in by some one who
was a man as well as a king. But if his palaces might have housed,
without the least incongruity, a well-bred gentleman, conversely his
common houses were always dignified enough, however small, to be palaces
in miniature and the homes of kings.

In the course of the two hundred years which have elapsed since his
death, Wren’s successors have often departed, with melancholy results,
from the tradition of which he was the founder. They have forgotten, in
their architecture, the art of being gentlemen. Infected by a touch of
the baroque _folie de grandeur_, the architects of the eighteenth
century built houses in imitation of Versailles and Caserta—huge stage
houses, all for show and magnificence and all but impossible to live in.

The architects of the nineteenth century sinned in a diametrically
opposite way—towards meanness and a negation of art. Senselessly
preoccupied with details, they created the nightmare architecture of
“features.” The sham Gothic of early Victorian times yielded at the end
of the century to the nauseous affectation of “sham-peasantry.” Big
houses were built with all the irregularity and more than the
“quaintness” of cottages; suburban villas took the form of machine-made
imitations of the Tudor peasant’s hut. To all intents and purposes
architecture ceased to exist; Ruskin had triumphed.

To-day, however, there are signs that architecture is coming back to
that sane and dignified tradition of which Wren was the great exponent.
Architects are building houses for gentlemen to live in. Let us hope
that they will continue to do so. There may be sublimer types of men
than the gentleman: there are saints, for example, and the great
enthusiasts whose thoughts and actions move the world. But for practical
purposes and in a civilized, orderly society, the gentleman remains,
after all, the ideal man. The most profound religious emotions have been
expressed in Gothic architecture. Human ambitions and aspirations have
been most colossally reflected by the Romans and the Italians of the
baroque. But it is in England that the golden mean of reasonableness and
decency—the practical philosophy of the civilized man—has received its
most elegant and dignified expression. The old gentleman who died two
hundred years ago preached on the subject of civilization a number of
sermons in stone. St. Paul’s and Greenwich, Trinity Library and Hampton
Court, Chelsea, Kilmainham, Blackheath and Rochester, St. Stephen’s,
Wallbrook and St. Mary Ab-church, Kensington orangery and Middle Temple
gateway—these are the titles of a few of them. They have much, if we
will but study them, to teach us.




                          XXVI: BEN JONSON[3]


It comes as something of a surprise to find that the niche reserved for
Ben Jonson in the “English Men of Letters” series has only now been
filled. One expected somehow that he would have been among the first of
the great ones to be enshrined; but no, he has had a long time to wait;
and Adam Smith, and Sydney Smith, and Hazlitt, and Fanny Burney have
gone before him into the temple of fame. Now, however, his monument has
at last been made, with Professor Gregory Smith’s qualified version of
“O rare Ben Jonson!” duly and definitively carved upon it.

What is it that makes us, almost as a matter of course, number Ben
Jonson among the great? Why should we expect him to be an early
candidate for immortality, or why, indeed, should he be admitted to the
“English Men of Letters” series at all? These are difficult questions to
answer; for when we come to consider the matter we find ourselves unable
to give any very glowing account of Ben or his greatness. It is hard to
say that one likes his work; one cannot honestly call him a good poet or
a supreme dramatist. And yet, unsympathetic as he is, uninteresting as
he often can be, we still go on respecting and admiring him, because, in
spite of everything, we are conscious, obscurely but certainly, that he
was a great man.

He had little influence on his successors; the comedy of humours died
without any but an abortive issue. Shadwell, the mountain-bellied “Og,
from a treason tavern rolling home,” is not a disciple that any man
would have much pride in claiming. No raking up of literary history will
make Ben Jonson great as a founder of a school or an inspirer of others.
His greatness is a greatness of character. There is something almost
alarming in the spectacle of this formidable figure advancing with
tank-like irresistibility towards the goal he had set himself to attain.
No sirens of romance can seduce him, no shock of opposition unseat him
in his career. He proceeds along the course theoretically mapped out at
the inception of his literary life, never deviating from this narrow way
till the very end—till the time when, in his old age, he wrote that
exquisite pastoral, _The Sad Shepherd_, which is so complete and
absolute a denial of all his lifelong principles. But _The Sad Shepherd_
is a weakness, albeit a triumphant weakness. Ben, as he liked to look
upon himself, as he has again and again revealed himself to us, is the
artist with principles, protesting against the anarchic absence of
principle among the geniuses and charlatans, the poets and ranters of
his age.

  The true artificer will not run away from nature as he were afraid of
  her; or depart from life and the likeness of truth; but speak to the
  capacity of his hearers. And though his language differ from the
  vulgar somewhat, it shall not fly from all humanity, with the
  Tamerlanes and Tamer-Chams of the late age, which had nothing in them
  but the scenical strutting and furious vociferation to warrant them to
  the ignorant gapers. He knows it is his only art, so to carry it as
  none but artificers perceive it. In the meantime, perhaps, he is
  called barren, dull, lean, a poor writer, or by what contumelious word
  can come in their cheeks, by these men who without labour, judgment,
  knowledge, or almost sense, are received or preferred before him.

In these sentences from _Discoveries_ Ben Jonson paints his own
picture—portrait of the artist as a true artificer—setting forth, in its
most general form, and with no distracting details of the humours or the
moral purpose of art, his own theory of the artist’s true function and
nature. Jonson’s theory was no idle speculation, no mere thing of words
and air, but a creed, a principle, a categorical imperative,
conditioning and informing his whole work. Any study of the poet must,
therefore, begin with the formulation of his theory, and must go on, as
Professor Gregory Smith’s excellent essay does indeed proceed, to show
in detail how the theory was applied and worked out in each individual
composition.

A good deal of nonsense has been talked at one time or another about
artistic theories. The artist is told that he should have no theories,
that he should warble native wood-notes wild, that he should “sing,” be
wholly spontaneous, should starve his brain and cultivate his heart and
spleen; that an artistic theory cramps the style, stops up the Helicons
of inspiration, and so on, and so on. The foolish and sentimental
conception of the artist, to which these anti-intellectual doctrines are
a corollary, dates from the time of romanticism and survives among the
foolish and sentimental of to-day. A consciously practised theory of art
has never spoiled a good artist, has never dammed up inspiration, but
rather, and in most cases profitably, canalized it. Even the Romantics
had theories and were wild and emotional on principle.

Theories are above all necessary at moments when old traditions are
breaking up, when all is chaos and in flux. At such moments an artist
formulates his theory and clings to it through thick and thin; clings to
it as the one firm raft of security in the midst of the surrounding
unrest. Thus, when the neo-Classicism, of which Ben was one of the
remote ancestors, was crumbling into the nothingness of _The Loves of
the Plants_ and _The Triumphs of Temper_, Wordsworth found salvation by
the promulgation of a new theory of poetry, which he put into practice
systematically and to the verge of absurdity in _Lyrical Ballads_.
Similarly in the shipwreck of the old tradition of painting we find the
artists of the present day clinging desperately to intellectual formulas
as their only hope in the chaos. The only occasions, in fact, when the
artist can afford entirely to dispense with theory occur in periods when
a well-established tradition reigns supreme and unquestioned. And then
the absence of theory is more apparent than real; for the tradition in
which he is working is a theory, originally formulated by someone else,
which he accepts unconsciously and as though it were the law of Nature
itself.

The beginning of the seventeenth century was not one of these periods of
placidity and calm acceptance. It was a moment of growth and decay
together, of fermentation. The fabulous efflorescence of the Renaissance
had already grown rank. With that extravagance of energy which
characterized them in all things, the Elizabethans had exaggerated the
traditions of their literature into insincerity. All artistic traditions
end, in due course, by being reduced to the absurd; but the Elizabethans
crammed the growth and decline of a century into a few years. One after
another they transfigured and then destroyed every species of art they
touched. Euphuism, Petrarchism, Spenserism, the sonnet, the drama—some
lasted a little longer than others, but they all exploded in the end,
these beautiful iridescent bubbles blown too big by the enthusiasm of
their makers.

But in the midst of this unstable luxuriance voices of protest were to
be heard, reactions against the main romantic current were discernible.
Each in his own way and in his own sphere, Donne and Ben Jonson
protested aganst the exaggerations of the age. At a time when sonneteers
in legions were quibbling about the blackness of their ladies’ eyes or
the golden wires of their hair, when Platonists protested in melodious
chorus that they were not in love with “red and white” but with the
ideal and divine beauty of which peach-blossom complexions were but
inadequate shadows, at a time when love-poetry had become, with rare
exceptions, fantastically unreal, Donne called it back, a little grossly
perhaps, to facts with the dry remark:

              Love’s not so pure and abstract as they use
              To say, who have no mistress but their muse.

There have been poets who have written more lyrically than Donne, more
fervently about certain amorous emotions, but not one who has formulated
so rational a philosophy of love as a whole, who has seen all the facts
so clearly and judged them so soundly. Donne laid down no literary
theory. His followers took from him all that was relatively
unimportant—the harshness, itself a protest against Spenserian facility,
the conceits, the sensuality tempered by mysticism—but the important and
original quality of Donne’s work, the psychological realism, they could
not, through sheer incapacity, transfer into their own poetry. Donne’s
immediate influence was on the whole bad. Any influence for good he may
have had has been on poets of a much later date.

The other great literary Protestant of the time was the curious subject
of our examination, Ben Jonson. Like Donne he was a realist. He had no
use for claptrap, or rant, or romanticism. His aim was to give his
audiences real facts flavoured with sound morality. He failed to be a
great realist, partly because he lacked the imaginative insight to
perceive more than the most obvious and superficial reality, and partly
because he was so much preoccupied with the sound morality that he was
prepared to sacrifice truth to satire; so that in place of characters he
gives us humours, not minds, but personified moral qualities.

Ben hated romanticism; for, whatever may have been his bodily habits,
however infinite his capacity for drinking sack, he belonged
intellectually to the party of sobriety. In all ages the drunks and the
sobers have confronted one another, each party loud in derision and
condemnation of the defects which it observes in the other. “The
Tamerlanes and Tamer-Chams of the late age” accuse the sober Ben of
being “barren, dull, lean, a poor writer.” Ben retorts that they “have
nothing in them but the scenical strutting and furious vociferation to
warrant them to the ignorant gapers.” At another period it is the
Hernanis and the Rollas who reproach that paragon of dryness, the almost
fiendishly sober Stendhal, with his grocer’s style. Stendhal in his turn
remarks: “En paraissant, vers 1803, le _Génie_ de Chateaubriand m’a
semblé ridicule.” And to-day? We have our sobers and our drunks, our
Hardy and our Belloc, our Santayana and our Chesterton. The distinction
is eternally valid. Our personal sympathies may lie with one or the
other; but it is obvious that we could dispense with neither. Ben, then,
was one of the sobers, protesting with might and main against the
extravagant behaviour of the drunks, an intellectual insisting that
there was no way of arriving at truth except by intellectual processes,
an apotheosis of the Plain Man determined to stand no nonsense about
anything. Ben’s poetical achievement, such as it is, is the achievement
of one who relied on no mysterious inspiration, but on those solid
qualities of sense, perseverance, and sound judgment which any decent
citizen of a decent country may be expected to possess. That he himself
possessed, hidden somewhere in the obscure crypts and recesses of his
mind, other rarer spiritual qualities is proved by the existence of his
additions to _The Spanish Tragedy_—if, indeed, they are his, which there
is no cogent reason to doubt—and his last fragment of a masterpiece,
_The Sad Shepherd_. But these qualities, as Professor Gregory Smith
points out, he seems deliberately to have suppressed; locked them away,
at the bidding of his imperious theory, in the strange dark places from
which, at the beginning and the very end of his career, they emerged. He
might have been a great romantic, one of the sublime inebriates; he
chose rather to be classical and sober. Working solely with the logical
intellect and rejecting as dangerous the aid of those uncontrolled
illogical elements of imagination, he produced work that is in its own
way excellent. It is well-wrought, strong, heavy with learning and what
the Chaucerians would call “high sentence.” The emotional intensity and
brevity excepted, it possesses all the qualities of the French classical
drama. But the quality which characterizes the best Elizabethan and
indeed the best English poetry of all periods, the power of moving in
two worlds at once, it lacks. Jonson, like the French dramatists of the
seventeenth century, moves on a level, directly towards some logical
goal. The road over which his great contemporaries take us is not level;
it is, as it were, tilted and uneven, so that as we proceed along it we
are momently shot off at a tangent from the solid earth of logical
meaning into superior regions where the intellectual laws of gravity
have no control. The mistake of Jonson and the classicists in general
consists in supposing that nothing is of value that is not susceptible
of logical analysis; whereas the truth is that the greatest triumphs of
art take place in a world that is not wholly of the intellect, but lies
somewhere between it and the inenarrable, but, to those who have
penetrated it, supremely real, world of the mystic. In his fear and
dislike of nonsense, Jonson put away from himself not only the
Tamer-Chams and the fustian of the late age, but also most of the beauty
it had created.

With the romantic emotions of his predecessors and contemporaries Jonson
abandoned much of the characteristically Elizabethan form of their
poetry. That extraordinary melodiousness which distinguishes the
Elizabethan lyric is not to be found in any of Ben’s writing. The poems
by which we remember him—“Cynthia,” “Drink to Me Only,” “It is Not
Growing Like a Tree”—are classically well made (though the cavalier
lyrists were to do better in the same style); but it is not for any
musical qualities that we remember them. One can understand Ben’s
critical contempt for those purely formal devices for producing musical
richness in which the Elizabethans delighted.

            Eyes, why did you bring unto me these graces,
            Grac’d to yield wonder out of her true measure,
            Measure of all joyes’ stay to phansie traces
                    Module of pleasure.

The device is childish in its formality, the words, in their obscurity,
almost devoid of significance. But what matter, since the stanza is a
triumph of sonorous beauty? The Elizabethans devised many ingenuities of
this sort; the minor poets exploited them until they became ridiculous;
the major poets employed them with greater discretion, playing subtle
variations (as in Shakespeare’s sonnets) on the crude theme. When
writers had something to say, their thoughts, poured into these
copiously elaborate forms, were moulded to the grandest, poetical
eloquence. A minor poet, like Lord Brooke, from whose works we have just
quoted a specimen of pure formalism, could produce, in his moments of
inspiration, such magnificent lines as:

            The mind of Man is this world’s true dimension,
              And knowledge is the measure of the mind;

or these, of the nethermost hell:

              A place there is upon no centre placed,
              Deepe under depthes, as farre as is the skie
              Above the earth; darke, infinitely spaced:
              Pluto the king, the kingdome, miserie.

Even into comic poetry the Elizabethans imported the grand manner. The
anonymous author of

                   Tee-hee, tee-hee! Oh sweet delight
                   He tickles this age, who can
                   Call Tullia’s ape a marmosite
                   And Leda’s goose a swan,

knew the secret of that rich, facile music which all those who wrote in
the grand Elizabethan tradition could produce. Jonson, like Donne,
reacted against the facility and floridity of this technique, but in a
different way. Donne’s protest took the form of a conceited subtlety of
thought combined with a harshness of metre. Jonson’s classical training
inclined him towards clarity, solidity of sense, and economy of form. He
stands, as a lyrist, half-way between the Elizabethans and the cavalier
song-writers; he has broken away from the old tradition, but has not yet
made himself entirely at home in the new. At the best he achieves a
minor perfection of point and neatness. At the worst he falls into that
dryness and dulness with which he knew he could be reproached.

We have seen from the passage concerning the true artificer that Jonson
fully realized the risk he was running. He recurs more than once in
_Discoveries_ to the same theme, “Some men to avoid redundancy run into
that [a “thin, flagging, poor, starved” style]; and while they strive to
have no ill-blood or juice, they lose their good.” The good that Jonson
lost was a great one. And in the same way we see to-day how a fear of
becoming sentimental, or “chocolate-boxy,” drives many of the younger
poets and artists to shrink from treating of the great emotions or the
obvious lavish beauty of the earth. But to eschew a good because the
corruption of it is very bad is surely a sign of weakness and a folly.

Having lost the realm of romantic beauty—lost it deliberately and of set
purpose—Ben Jonson devoted the whole of his immense energy to portraying
and reforming the ugly world of fact. But his reforming satiric
intentions interfered, as we have already shown, with his realistic
intentions, and instead of recreating in his art the actual world of
men, he invented the wholly intellectual and therefore wholly unreal
universe of Humours. It is an odd new world, amusing to look at from the
safe distance that separates stage from stalls; but not a place one
could ever wish to live in—one’s neighbours, fools, knaves, hypocrites,
and bears would make the most pleasing prospect intolerable. And over it
all is diffused the atmosphere of Jonson’s humour. It is a curious kind
of humour, very different from anything that passes under that name
to-day, from the humour of _Punch_, or _A Kiss for Cinderella_. One has
only to read _Volpone_—or, better still, go to see it when it is acted
this year by the Phœnix Society for the revival of old plays—to realize
that Ben’s conception of a joke differed materially from ours. Humour
has never been the same since Rousseau invented humanitarianism.
Syphilis and broken legs were still a great deal more comic in
Smollett’s day than in our own. There is a cruelty, a heartlessness
about much of the older humour which is sometimes shocking, sometimes,
in its less extreme forms, pleasantly astringent and stimulating after
the orgies of quaint pathos and sentimental comedy in which we are
nowadays forced to indulge. There is not a pathetic line in _Volpone_;
all the characters are profoundly unpleasant, and the fun is almost as
grim as fun can be. Its heartlessness is not the brilliant, cynical
heartlessness of the later Restoration comedy, but something ponderous
and vast. It reminds us of one of those enormous, painful jokes which
fate sometimes plays on humanity. There is no alleviation, no purging by
pity and terror. It requires a very hearty sense of humour to digest it.
We have reason to admire our ancestors for their ability to enjoy this
kind of comedy as it should be enjoyed. It would get very little
appreciation from a London audience of to-day.

In the other comedies the fun is not so grim; but there is a certain
hardness and brutality about them all—due, of course, ultimately to the
fact that the characters are not human, but rather marionettes of wood
and metal that collide and belabour one another, like the ferocious
puppets of the Punch and Judy show, without feeling the painfulness of
the proceeding. Shakespeare’s comedy is not heartless, because the
characters are human and sensitive. Our modern sentimentality is a
corruption, a softening of genuine humanity. We need a few more Jonsons
and Congreves, some more plays like _Volpone_, or that inimitable
_Marriage à la Mode_ of Dryden, in which the curtain goes up on a lady
singing the outrageously cynical song that begins:

                   Why should a foolish marriage vow,
                     That long ago was made,
                   Constrain us to each other now
                     When pleasure is decayed?

Too much heartlessness is intolerable (how soon one turns, revolted,
from the literature of the Restoration!), but a little of it now and
then is bracing, a tonic for relaxed sensibilities. A little ruthless
laughter clears the air as nothing else can do; it is good for us, every
now and then, to see our ideals laughed at, our conception of nobility
caricatured; it is good for solemnity’s nose to be tweaked, it is good
for human pomposity to be made to look mean and ridiculous. It should be
the great social function—as Marinetti has pointed out—of the music
halls, to provide this cruel and unsparing laughter, to make a
buffoonery of all the solemnly accepted grandeurs and nobilities. A good
dose of this mockery, administered twice a year at the equinoxes, should
purge our minds of much waste matter, make nimble our spirits and
brighten the eye to look more clearly and truthfully on the world about
us.

Ben’s reduction of human beings to a series of rather unpleasant Humours
is sound and medicinal. Humours do not, of course, exist in actuality;
they are true only as caricatures are true. There are times when we
wonder whether a caricature is not, after all, truer than a photograph;
there are others when it seems a stupid lie. But at all times a
caricature is disquieting; and it is very good for most of us to be made
uncomfortable.




                             XXVII: CHAUCER


There are few things more melancholy than the spectacle of literary
fossilization. A great writer comes into being, lives, labours and dies.
Time passes; year by year the sediment of muddy comment and criticism
thickens round the great man’s bones. The sediment sets firm; what was
once a living organism becomes a thing of marble. On the attainment of
total fossilization the great man has become a classic. It becomes
increasingly difficult for the members of each succeeding generation to
remember that the stony objects which fill the museum cases were once
alive. It is often a work of considerable labour to reconstruct the
living animal from the fossil shape. But the trouble is generally worth
taking. And in no case is it more worth while than in Chaucer’s.

With Chaucer the ordinary fossilizing process, to which every classical
author is subject, has been complicated by the petrifaction of his
language. Five hundred years have almost sufficed to turn the most
living of poets into a substitute on the modern sides of schools for the
mental gymnastic of Latin and Greek. Prophetically, Chaucer saw the fate
that awaited him and appealed against his doom:

             Ye know eke that, in form of speech is change
             Within a thousand year, and wordes tho
             That hadden price, now wonder nice and strange
             Us thinketh them; and yet they spake them so,
             And sped as well in love as men now do.

The body of his poetry may have grown old, but its spirit is still young
and immortal. To know that spirit—and not to know it is to ignore
something that is of unique importance in the history of our
literature—it is necessary to make the effort of becoming familiar with
the body it informs and gives life to. The antique language and
versification, so “wonder nice and strange” to our ears, are obstacles
in the path of most of those who read for pleasure’s sake (not that any
reader worthy of the name ever reads for anything else but pleasure); to
the pedants they are an end in themselves. Theirs is the carcass, but
not the soul. Between those who are daunted by his superficial
difficulties and those who take too much delight in them Chaucer finds
but few sympathetic readers. I hope in these pages to be able to give a
few of the reasons that make Chaucer so well worth reading.

Chaucer’s art is, by its very largeness and objectiveness, extremely
difficult to subject to critical analysis. Confronted by it, Dryden
could only exclaim, “Here is God’s plenty!”—and the exclamation proves,
when all is said, to be the most adequate and satisfying of all
criticisms. All that the critic can hope to do is to expand and to
illustrate Dryden’s exemplary brevity.

“God’s plenty!”—the phrase is a peculiarly happy one. It calls up a
vision of the prodigal earth, of harvest fields, of innumerable beasts
and birds, of teeming life. And it is in the heart of this living and
material world of Nature that Chaucer lives. He is the poet of earth,
supremely content to walk, desiring no wings. Many English poets have
loved the earth for the sake of something—a dream, a reality, call it
which you will—that lies behind it. But there have been few, and, except
for Chaucer, no poets of greatness, who have been in love with earth for
its own sake, with Nature in the sense of something inevitably material,
something that is the opposite of the supernatural. Supreme over
everything in this world he sees the natural order, the “law of kind,”
as he calls it. The teachings of most of the great prophets and poets
are simply protests against the law of kind. Chaucer does not protest,
he accepts. It is precisely this acceptance that makes him unique among
English poets. He does not go to Nature as the symbol of some further
spiritual reality; hills, flowers, sea, and clouds are not, for him,
transparencies through which the workings of a great soul are visible.
No, they are opaque; he likes them for what they are, things pleasant
and beautiful, and not the less delicious because they are definitely of
the earth earthy. Human beings, in the same way, he takes as he finds,
noble and beastish, but, on the whole, wonderfully decent. He has none
of that strong ethical bias which is usually to be found in the English
mind. He is not horrified by the behaviour of his fellow-beings, and he
has no desire to reform them. Their characters, their motives interest
him, and he stands looking on at them, a happy spectator. This serenity
of detachment, this placid acceptance of things and people as they are,
is emphasized if we compare the poetry of Chaucer with that of his
contemporary, Langland, or whoever it was that wrote _Piers Plowman_.

The historians tell us that the later years of the fourteenth century
were among the most disagreeable periods of our national history.
English prosperity was at a very low ebb. The Black Death had
exterminated nearly a third of the working population of the islands, a
fact which, aggravated by the frenzied legislation of the Government,
had led to the unprecedented labour troubles that culminated in the
peasants’ revolt. Clerical corruption and lawlessness were rife. All
things considered, even our own age is preferable to that in which
Chaucer lived. Langland does not spare denunciation; he is appalled by
the wickedness about him, scandalized at the openly confessed vices that
have almost ceased to pay to virtue the tribute of hypocrisy.
Indignation is the inspiration of _Piers Plowman_, the righteous
indignation of the prophet. But to read Chaucer one would imagine that
there was nothing in fourteenth-century England to be indignant about.
It is true that the Pardoner, the Friar, the Shipman, the Miller, and,
in fact, most of the Canterbury pilgrims are rogues and scoundrels; but,
then, they are such “merry harlots” too. It is true that the Monk
prefers hunting to praying, that, in these latter days when fairies are
no more, “there is none other incubus” but the friar, that “purse is the
Archdeacon’s hell,” and the Summoner a villain of the first magnitude;
but Chaucer can only regard these things as primarily humorous. The fact
of people not practising what they preach is an unfailing source of
amusement to him. Where Langland cries aloud in anger, threatening the
world with hell-fire, Chaucer looks on and smiles. To the great
political crisis of his time he makes but one reference, and that a
comic one:

               So hideous was the noyse, ah _benedicite_!
               Certes he Jakke Straw, and his meyné,
               Ne maden schoutes never half so schrille,
               Whan that they wolden eny Flemyng kille,
               As thilke day was mad upon the fox.

Peasants may revolt, priests break their vows, lawyers lie and cheat,
and the world in general indulge its sensual appetites; why try and
prevent them, why protest? After all, they are all simply being natural,
they are all following the law of kind. A reasonable man, like himself,
“flees fro the pres and dwelles with soothfastnesse.” But reasonable men
are few, and it is the nature of human beings to be the unreasonable
sport of instinct and passion, just as it is the nature of the daisy to
open its eye to the sun and of the goldfinch to be a spritely and
“gaylard” creature. The law of kind has always and in everything
dominated; there is no rubbing nature against the hair. For

            God it wot, there may no man embrace
            As to destreyne a thing, the which nature
            Hath naturelly set in a creature.
            Take any brid, and put him in a cage,
            And do all thine entent and thy corrage
            To foster it tendrely with meat and drynke,
            And with alle the deyntees thou canst bethinke,
            And keep it all so kyndly as thou may;
            Although his cage of gold be never so gay,
            Yet hath this brid, by twenty thousand fold,
            Lever in a forest, that is wyld and cold,
            Gon ete wormes, and such wrecchidnes;
            For ever this brid will doon his busynes
            To scape out of his cage when that he may;
            His liberté the brid desireth aye ...
            Lo, heer hath kynd his dominacioun,
            And appetyt flemeth (banishes) discrescioun.
            Also a she wolf hath a vilayne kynde,
            The lewideste wolf that she may fynde,
            Or least of reputacioun, him will sche take,
            In tyme whan hir lust to have a make.
            Alle this ensaumples tell I by these men
            That ben untrewe, and nothing by wommen.

(As the story from which these lines are quoted happens to be about an
unfaithful wife, it seems that, in making the female sex immune from the
action of the law of kind, Chaucer is indulging a little in irony.)

              For men han ever a licorous appetit
              On lower thing to parforme her delit
              Than on her wyves, ben they never so faire,
              Ne never so trewe, ne so debonaire.

Nature, deplorable as some of its manifestations may be, must always and
inevitably assert itself. The law of kind has power even over immortal
souls. This fact is the source of the poet’s constantly expressed
dislike of celibacy and asceticism. The doctrine that upholds the
superiority of the state of virginity over that of wedlock is, to begin
with (he holds), a danger to the race. It encourages a process which we
may be permitted to call dysgenics—the carrying on of the species by the
worst members. The Host’s words to the Monk are memorable:

          Allas! why wearest thou so wide a cope?
          God give me sorwe! and I were a pope
          Nought only thou, but every mighty man,
          Though he were shore brode upon his pan (head)
          Should han a wife; for all this world is lorn;
          Religioun hath take up all the corn
          Of tredyng, and we burel (humble) men ben shrimpes;
          Of feble trees there cometh wrecchid impes.
          This maketh that our heires ben so sclendere
          And feble, that they may not wel engendre.

But it is not merely dangerous; it is anti-natural. That is the theme of
the Wife of Bath’s Prologue. Counsels of perfection are all very well
when they are given to those

              That wolde lyve parfytly;
              But, lordyngs, by your leve, that am not I.

The bulk of us must live as the law of kind enjoins.

It is characteristic of Chaucer’s conception of the world, that the
highest praise he can bestow on anything is to assert of it, that it
possesses in the highest degree the qualities of its own particular
kind. Thus of Cressida he says:

               She was not with the least of her stature,
               But all her limbes so well answering
               Weren to womanhood, that creature
               Nas never lesse mannish in seeming.

The horse of brass in the _Squire’s Tale_ is

               So well proportioned to be strong,
               Right as it were a steed of Lombardye,
               Thereto so _horsely_ and so quick of eye.

Everything that is perfect of its kind is admirable, even though the
kind may not be an exalted one. It is, for instance, a joy to see the
way in which the Canon sweats:

            A cloote-leaf (dock leaf) he had under his hood
            For sweat, and for to keep his head from heat.
            But it was joye for to see him sweat;
            His forehead dropped as a stillatorie
            Were full of plantain or of peritorie.

The Canon is supreme in the category of sweaters, the very type and idea
of perspiring humanity; therefore he is admirable and joyous to behold,
even as a horse that is supremely horsely or a woman less mannish than
anything one could imagine. In the same way it is a delight to behold
the Pardoner preaching to the people. In its own kind his charlatanism
is perfect and deserves admiration:

                 Mine handes and my tonge gon so yerne,
                 That it is joye to see my busynesse.

This manner of saying of things that they are joyous, or, very often,
heavenly, is typical of Chaucer. He looks out on the world with a
delight that never grows old or weary. The sights and sounds of daily
life, all the lavish beauty of the earth fill him with a pleasure which
he can only express by calling it a “joy” or a “heaven.” It “joye was to
see” Cressida and her maidens playing together; and

                So aungellyke was her native beauté
                That like a thing immortal seemede she,
                As doth an heavenish parfit creature.

The peacock has angel’s feathers; a girl’s voice is heavenly to hear:

                          Antigone the shene
                Gan on a Trojan song to singen clear,
                That it an heaven was her voice to hear.

One could go on indefinitely multiplying quotations that testify to
Chaucer’s exquisite sensibility to sensuous beauty and his immediate,
almost exclamatory response to it. Above all, he is moved by the beauty
of “young, fresh folkes, he and she”; by the grace and swiftness of
living things, birds and animals; by flowers and placid, luminous,
park-like landscapes.

It is interesting to note how frequently Chaucer speaks of animals. Like
many other sages, he perceives that an animal is, in a certain sense,
more human in character than a man. For an animal bears the same
relation to a man as a caricature to a portrait. In a way a caricature
is truer than a portrait. It reveals all the weaknesses and absurdities
that flesh is heir to. The portrait brings out the greatness and dignity
of the spirit that inhabits the often ridiculous flesh. It is not merely
that Chaucer has written regular fables, though the _Nun’s Priest’s
Tale_ puts him among the great fabulists of the world, and there is also
much definitely fabular matter in the _Parliament of Fowls_. No, his
references to the beasts are not confined to his animal stories alone;
they are scattered broadcast throughout his works. He relies for much of
his psychology and for much of his most vivid description on the
comparison of man, in his character and appearance (which with Chaucer
are always indissolubly blended), with the beasts. Take, for example,
that enchanting simile in which Troilus, stubbornly anti-natural in
refusing to love as the law of kind enjoins him, is compared to the
corn-fed horse, who has to be taught good behaviour and sound philosophy
under the whip:

             As proude Bayard ginneth for to skip
             Out of the way, so pricketh him his corn,
             Till he a lash have of the longe whip,
             Then thinketh he, “Though I prance all biforn,
             First in the trace, full fat and newe shorn,
             Yet am I but an horse, and horses’ law
             I must endure and with my feeres draw.”

Or, again, women with too pronounced a taste for fine apparel are
likened to the cat:

                And if the cattes skin be sleek and gay,
                She will not dwell in housé half a day,
                But forth she will, ere any day be dawet
                To show her skin and gon a caterwrawet.

In his descriptions of the personal appearance of his characters Chaucer
makes constant use of animal characteristics. Human beings, both
beautiful and hideous, are largely described in terms of animals. It is
interesting to see how often in that exquisite description of Alisoun,
the carpenter’s wife, Chaucer produces his clearest and sharpest effects
by a reference to some beast or bird:

               Fair was this younge wife, and therewithal
               As any weasel her body gent and small ...
               But of her song it was as loud and yern
               As is the swallow chittering on a barn.
               Thereto she coulde skip and make a game
               As any kid or calf following his dame.
               Her mouth was sweet as bragot is or meath,
               Or hoard of apples, laid in hay or heath.
               Wincing she was, as is a jolly colt,
               Long as a mast and upright as a bolt.

Again and again in Chaucer’s poems do we find such similitudes, and the
result is always a picture of extraordinary precision and liveliness.
Here, for example, are a few:

                Gaylard he was as goldfinch in the shaw,

or,

                  Such glaring eyen had he as an hare;

or,

                As piled (bald) as an ape was his skull.

The self-indulgent friars are

                           Like Jovinian,
                 Fat as a whale, and walken as a swan.

The Pardoner describes his own preaching in these words:

               Then pain I me to stretche forth my neck
               And east and west upon the people I beck,
               As doth a dove, sitting on a barn.

Very often, too, Chaucer derives his happiest metaphors from birds and
beasts. Of Troy in its misfortune and decline he says: Fortune

               Gan pull away the feathers bright of Troy
               From day to day.

Love-sick Troilus soliloquizes thus:

             He said: “O fool, now art thou in the snare
             That whilom japedest at lovés pain,
             Now art thou hent, now gnaw thin owné chain.”

The metaphor of Troy’s bright feathers reminds me of a very beautiful
simile borrowed from the life of the plants:

             And as in winter leavés been bereft,
             Each after other, till the tree be bare,
             So that there nis but bark and branches left,
             Lieth Troilus, bereft of each welfare,
             Ybounden in the blacke bark of care.

And this, in turn, reminds me of that couplet in which Chaucer compares
a girl to a flowering pear-tree:

                  She was well more blissful on to see
                  Than is the newe parjonette tree.

Chaucer is as much at home among the stars as he is among the birds and
beasts and flowers of earth. There are some literary men of to-day who
are not merely not ashamed to confess their total ignorance of all facts
of a “scientific” order, but even make a boast of it. Chaucer would have
regarded such persons with pity and contempt. His own knowledge of
astronomy was wide and exact. Those whose education has been as horribly
imperfect as my own will always find some difficulty in following him as
he moves with easy assurance through the heavens. Still, it is possible
without knowing any mathematics to appreciate Chaucer’s descriptions of
the great pageant of the sun and stars as they march in triumph from
mansion to mansion through the year. He does not always trouble to take
out his astrolabe and measure the progress of “Phebus, with his rosy
cart”; he can record the god’s movements in more general terms than may
be understood even by the literary man of nineteen hundred and
twenty-three. Here, for example, is a description of “the colde frosty
seisoun of Decembre,” in which matters celestial and earthly are mingled
to make a picture of extraordinary richness:

            Phebus wox old and hewed like latoun,
            That in his hoté declinacioun
            Shone as the burned gold, with streames bright;
            But now in Capricorn adown he light,
            Where as he shone full pale; I dare well sayn
            The bitter frostes with the sleet and rain
            Destroyed hath the green in every yerd.
            Janus sit by the fire with double beard,
            And drinketh of his bugle horn the wine;
            Beforn him stont the brawn of tusked swine,
            And “_noel_” cryeth every lusty man.

In astrology he does not seem to have believed. The magnificent passage
in the _Man of Law’s Tale_, where it is said that

                In the starres, clearer than is glass,
                Is written, God wot, whoso can it read,
                The death of every man withouten drede,

is balanced by the categorical statement found in the scientific and
educational treatise on the astrolabe, that judicial astrology is mere
deceit.

His scepticism with regard to astrology is not surprising. Highly as he
prizes authority, he prefers the evidence of experience, and where that
evidence is lacking he is content to profess a quiet agnosticism. His
respect for the law of kind is accompanied by a complementary mistrust
of all that does not appear to belong to the natural order of things.
There are moments when he doubts even the fundamental beliefs of the
Church:

           A thousand sythes have I herd men telle
           That there is joye in heaven and peyne in helle;
           And I accorde well that it be so.
           But natheless, this wot I well also
           That there is none that dwelleth in this countree
           That either hath in helle or heaven y-be.

Of the fate of the spirit after death he speaks in much the same style:

           His spiryt changed was, and wente there
           As I came never, I cannot tellen where;
           Therefore I stint, I nam no divinistre;
           Of soules fynde I not in this registre,
           Ne me list not th’ opiniouns to telle
           Of hem, though that they witten where they dwelle.

He has no patience with superstitions. Belief in dreams, in auguries,
fear of the “ravenes qualm or schrychynge of thise owles” are all
unbefitting to a self-respecting man:

                To trowen on it bothe false and foul is;
                Alas, alas, so noble a creature
                As is a man shall dreaden such ordure!

By an absurd pun he turns all Calchas’s magic arts of prophecy to
ridicule:

               So when this Calkas knew by calkulynge,
               And eke by answer of this Apollo
               That Grekes sholden such a people bringe,
               Through which that Troye muste ben fordo,
               He cast anon out of the town to go.

It would not be making a fanciful comparison to say that Chaucer in many
respects resembles Anatole France. Both men possess a profound love of
this world for its own sake, coupled with a profound and gentle
scepticism about all that lies beyond this world. To both of them the
lavish beauty of Nature is a never-failing and all-sufficient source of
happiness. Neither of them are ascetics; in pain and privation they see
nothing but evil. To both of them the notion that self-denial and
self-mortification are necessarily righteous and productive of good is
wholly alien. Both of them are apostles of sweetness and light, of
humanity and reasonableness. Unbounded tolerance of human weakness and a
pity, not the less sincere for being a little ironical, characterize
them both. Deep knowledge of the evils and horrors of this
unintelligible world makes them all the more attached to its kindly
beauty. But in at least one important respect Chaucer shows himself to
be the greater, the completer spirit. He possesses, what Anatole France
does not, an imaginative as well as an intellectual comprehension of
things. Faced by the multitudinous variety of human character, Anatole
France exhibits a curious impotence of imagination. He does not
understand characters in the sense that, say, Tolstoy understands them;
he cannot, by the power of imagination, get inside them, become what he
contemplates. None of the persons of his creation are complete
characters; they cannot be looked at from every side; they are
portrayed, as it were, in the flat and not in three dimensions. But
Chaucer has the power of getting into someone else’s character. His
understanding of the men and women of whom he writes is complete; his
slightest character sketches are always solid and three-dimensional. The
Prologue to the _Canterbury Tales_, in which the effects are almost
entirely produced by the description of external physical features,
furnishes us with the most obvious example of his three-dimensional
drawing. Or, again, take that description in the Merchant’s tale of old
January and his young wife May after their wedding night. It is wholly a
description of external details, yet the result is not a superficial
picture. We are given a glimpse of the characters in their entirety:

            Thus laboureth he till that the day gan dawe.
            And then he taketh a sop in fine clarré,
            And upright in his bed then sitteth he.
            And after that he sang full loud and clear,
            And kissed his wife and made wanton cheer.
            He was all coltish, full of ragerye,
            And full of jargon as a flecked pye.
            The slacké skin about his necké shaketh,
            While that he sang, so chanteth he and craketh.
            But God wot what that May thought in her heart,
            When she him saw up sitting in his shirt,
            In his night cap and with his necké lean;
            She praiseth not his playing worth a bean.

But these are all slight sketches. For full-length portraits of
character we must turn to _Troilus and Cressida_, a work which, though
it was written before the fullest maturity of Chaucer’s powers, is in
many ways his most remarkable achievement, and one, moreover, which has
never been rivalled for beauty and insight in the whole held of English
narrative poetry. When one sees with what certainty and precision
Chaucer describes every movement of Cressida’s spirit from the first
movement she hears of Troilus’ love for her to the moment when she is
unfaithful to him, one can only wonder why the novel of character should
have been so slow to make its appearance. It was not until the
eighteenth century that narrative artists, using prose as their medium
instead of verse, began to rediscover the secrets that were familiar to
Chaucer in the fourteenth.

_Troilus and Cressida_ was written, as we have said, before Chaucer had
learnt to make the fullest use of his powers. In colouring it is
fainter, less sharp and brilliant than the best of the _Canterbury
Tales_. The character studies are there, carefully and accurately worked
out; but we miss the bright vividness of presentation with which Chaucer
was to endow his later art. The characters are all alive and completely
seen and understood. But they move, as it were, behind a veil—the veil
of that poetic convention which had, in the earliest poems, almost
completely shrouded Chaucer’s genius, and which, as he grew up, as he
adventured and discovered, grew thinner and thinner, and finally
vanished like gauzy mist in the sunlight. When _Troilus and Cressida_
was written the mist had not completely dissipated, and the figures of
his creation, complete in conception and execution as they are, are seen
a little dimly because of the interposed veil.

The only moment in the poem when Chaucer’s insight seems to fail him is
at the very end; he has to account for Cressida’s unfaithfulness, and he
is at a loss to know how he shall do it. Shakespeare, when he re-handled
the theme, had no such difficulty. His version of the story, planned on
much coarser lines than Chaucer’s, leads obviously and inevitably to the
fore-ordained conclusion; his Cressida is a minx who simply lives up to
her character. What could be more simple? But to Chaucer the problem is
not so simple. His Cressida is not a minx. From the moment he first sets
eyes on her Chaucer, like his own unhappy Troilus, falls head over ears
in love. Beautiful, gentle, gay; possessing, it is true, somewhat
“tendre wittes,” but making up for her lack of skill in ratiocination by
the “sudden avysements” of intuition; vain, but not disagreeably so, of
her good looks and of her power over so great and noble a knight as
Troilus; slow to feel love, but once she has yielded, rendering back to
Troilus passion for passion; in a word, the “least mannish” of all
possible creatures—she is to Chaucer the ideal of gracious and courtly
womanhood. But, alas, the old story tells us that Cressida jilted her
Troilus for that gross prize-fighter of a man, Diomed. The woman whom
Chaucer has made his ideal proves to be no better than she should be;
there is a flaw in the crystal. Chaucer is infinitely reluctant to admit
the fact. But the old story is specific in its statement; indeed, its
whole point consists in Cressida’s infidelity. Called upon to explain
his heroine’s fall, Chaucer is completely at a loss. He makes a few
half-hearted attempts to solve the problem, and then gives it up,
falling back on authority. The old clerks say it was so, therefore it
must be so, and that’s that. The fact is that Chaucer pitched his
version of the story in a different key from that which is found in the
“olde bokes,” with the result that the note on which he is compelled by
his respect for authority to close is completely out of harmony with the
rest of the music. It is this that accounts for the chief, and indeed
the only, defect of the poem—its hurried and boggled conclusion.

I cannot leave Cressida without some mention of the doom which was
prepared for her by one of Chaucer’s worthiest disciples, Robert
Henryson, in some ways the best of the Scottish poets of the fifteenth
and sixteenth centuries. Shocked by the fact that, in Chaucer’s poem,
Cressida receives no punishment for her infidelity, Henryson composed a
short sequel, _The Testament of Cresseid_, to show that poetic justice
was duly performed. Diomed, we are told, grew weary as soon as he had
“all his appetyte and mair, fulfillit on this fair ladie” and cast her
off, to become a common drab.

              O fair Cresseid! the flour and _A per se_
              Of Troy and Greece, how wast thow fortunait!
              To change in filth all thy feminitie
              And be with fleshly lust sa maculait,
              And go amang the Grekis, air and late
              So giglot-like.

In her misery she curses Venus and Cupid for having caused her to love
only to lead her to this degradation:

            The seed of love was sowen in my face
            And ay grew green through your supply and grace.
            But now, alas! that seed with frost is slain,
            And I fra lovers left, and all forlane.

In revenge Cupid and his mother summon a council of gods and condemn the
_A per se_ of Greece and Troy to be a hideous leper. And so she goes
forth with the other lepers, armed with bowl and clapper, to beg her
bread. One day Troilus rides past the place where she is sitting by the
roadside near the gates of Troy:

            Then upon him she cast up both her een,
              And with ane blenk it cam into his thocht,
            That he some time before her face had seen,
              But she was in such plight he knew her nocht,
              Yet then her look into his mind it brocht
            The sweet visage and amorous blenking
            Of fair Cresseid, one sometime his own darling.

He throws her an alms and the poor creature dies. And so the moral sense
is satisfied. There is a good deal of superfluous mythology and
unnecessary verbiage in _The Testament of Cresseid_, but the main lines
of the poem are firmly and powerfully drawn. Of all the disciples of
Chaucer, from Hoccleve and the Monk of Bury down to Mr. Masefield,
Henryson may deservedly claim to stand the highest.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                               FOOTNOTES


Footnote 1:

  _Collected Poems_, by Edward Thomas: with a Foreword by W. de la Mare.
  Selwyn & Blount.

Footnote 2:

  _Wordsworth: an Anthology_, edited, with a Preface, by T. J.
  Cobden-Sanderson. R. Cobden-Sanderson.

Footnote 3:

  _Ben Jonson_, by G. Gregory Smith. (English Men of Letters Series.)
  Macmillan, 1919.

------------------------------------------------------------------------


Transcriber’s Notes

The following minor changes have been made:

  The word “poety” was changed to “poetry” on page 42.

  A comma was added after “C” on page 63.

  Accents were added to “numérotés” on page 63 and “Où” on page 157.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of On the Margin, by Aldous Huxley

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ON THE MARGIN ***

***** This file should be named 60866-0.txt or 60866-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/0/8/6/60866/

Produced by MFR, Nigel Blower and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This book was
produced from images made available by the HathiTrust
Digital Library.)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


The Project Gutenberg EBook of Wilhelm Hauffs sämtliche Werke in sechs
Bänden. Dritter Band, by Wilhelm Hauff

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Wilhelm Hauffs sämtliche Werke in sechs Bänden. Dritter Band

Author: Wilhelm Hauff

Annotator: Alfred Weile

Release Date: December 7, 2019 [EBook #60873]

Language: German

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Einleitung.

    Von der Parteien Gunst und Haß verwirrt,
    Schwankt sein Charakterbild in der Geschichte;
    Doch euren Augen soll ihn jetzt die Kunst,
    Auch euren Herzen menschlich näher bringen: --
    Sie sieht den Menschen in des Lebens Drang
    Und wälzt die größre Hälfte seiner Schuld
    Den unglückseligen Gestirnen zu.

            _Schiller_.


Die Sage, womit sich die folgenden Blätter beschäftigen, gehört
jenem Teil des südlichen Deutschlands an, welcher sich zwischen den
Gebirgen der Alb und des Schwarzwaldes ausbreitet. Das erstere dieser
Gebirge schließt, von Nordwest nach Süden in verschiedener Breite sich
ausdehnend, in einer langen Bergkette dieses Land ein, der Schwarzwald
aber zieht sich von den Quellen der Donau bis hinüber an den Rhein und
bildet mit seinen schwärzlichen Tannenwäldern einen dunkeln Hintergrund
für die schöne, fruchtbare, weinreiche Landschaft, die, vom Neckar
durchströmt, an seinem Fuße sich ausbreitet und Württemberg heißt.

Dieses Land schritt aus geringem, dunklem Anfang unter mancherlei
Kämpfen siegend zu seiner jetzigen Stellung unter den Nachbarstaaten
hervor. Es erregt dies um so größere Bewunderung, wenn man die Zeit
bedenkt, in welcher sein Name zuerst aus dem Dunkel tritt; jene Zeit,
wo mächtige Grenznachbarn, wie die Staufen, die Herzöge von Teck, die
Grafen von Zollern um seine Wiege gelagert waren; wenn man die inneren
und äußeren Stürme bedenkt, die es durchzogen und oft selbst seinen
Namen aus den Annalen der Geschichte zu vertilgen drohten.

Gab es ja doch sogar eine Zeit, wo der Stamm seiner Beherrscher auf
ewig aus den Hallen ihrer Väter verdrängt schien, wo sein unglücklicher
Herzog aus seinen Grenzen fliehen und in drückender Verbannung leben
mußte, wo fremde Herren in seinen Burgen hausten, fremde Söldner das
Land bewachten, und wenig fehlte, daß Württemberg aufhörte zu sein,
jene blühenden Fluren zerrissen und eine Beute für viele oder eine
Provinz des Hauses Oesterreich wurde.

Unter den vielen Sagen, die von ihrem Lande und der Geschichte ihrer
Väter im Munde der Schwaben leben, ist wohl keine von so hohem
romantischen Interesse als die, welche sich an die Kämpfe der eben
erwähnten Zeit, an das wunderbare Schicksal jenes unglücklichen Fürsten
knüpft. Wir haben versucht, sie wiederzugeben, wie man sie auf den
Höhen von Lichtenstein und an den Ufern des Neckars erzählen hört,
wir haben es gewagt, auch auf die Gefahr hin, verkannt zu werden.
Man wird uns nämlich entgegenhalten, daß sich der Charakter Ulrichs
von Württemberg[1] nicht dazu eigne, in einem historischen Romane
mit milden Farben wiedergegeben zu werden. Man hat ihn vielfach
angefeindet, manches Auge hat sich sogar daran gewöhnt, wenn es die
lange Bilderreihe der Herzoge Württembergs mustert, mit scheuem Blick
vom ältern Eberhard auf Christoph[2] überzuspringen, als sei das
Unglück eines Landes nur allein in seinem Herrscher zu suchen, oder als
sei es verdienstlich, das Auge mit Abscheu zu wenden von den Tagen der
Not.

Und doch möchte es die Frage sein, ob man nicht in Beurteilung
dieses Fürsten nur seinem erbittertsten Feinde, Ulrich von Hutten,
nachbetet, der, um wenig zu sagen, hier allzusehr Partei ist, um als
leidenschaftloser Zeuge gelten zu können. Die Stimmen aber, die der
Herzog und seine Freunde erhoben, hat der rauschende Strom der Zeit
übertäubt, sie haben die zugleich anklagende und richtende Beredsamkeit
seines Feindes, jene donnernde Philippika ~in ducem Ulericum~, nicht
überdauert.

Wir haben fast alle gleichzeitigen Schriftsteller, die Stimmen eines
längst vergangenen vielbewegten Jahrhunderts, gewissenhaft verglichen
und fanden keinen, der ihn geradehin verdammt. Und wenn man bedenkt,
welch gewaltigen Einfluß Zeit und Umgebungen auf den Sterblichen
auszuüben pflegen, wenn man bedenkt, daß Ulrich von Württemberg
unter der Vormundschaft schlechter Räte aufwuchs, die ihn zum Bösen
anleiteten, um ihn nachher zu mißbrauchen, wenn man sich erinnert, daß
er in einem Alter die Zügel der Regierung in die Hände bekam, wo der
Knabe kaum zum Jüngling reif ist, so muß man wenigstens die erhabenen
Seiten seines Charakters, hohe Seelenstärke und einen Mut, der nie
zu unterdrücken ist, bewundern, sollte man es auch nicht über sich
vermögen, die Härten damit zu mildern, die in seiner Geschichte das
Auge beleidigen.

Das Jahr 1519, in welches unsere Sage fällt, hat über ihn entschieden,
denn es ist der Anfang seines langen Unglückes. Doch darf die Nachwelt
sagen, es war der Anfang seines Glückes. War ja doch jene lange
Verbannung ein läuterndes Feuer, woraus er weise und kräftiger als
je hervorging. Es war der Anfang seines Glückes, denn seine späteren
Regentenjahre wird jeder Württemberger segnen, der die religiöse
Umwälzung, die dieser Fürst in seinem Vaterlande bewerkstelligte, für
ein Glück ansieht.

In jenem Jahr war alles auf die Spitze gestellt. Der Aufruhr des
armen Konrad war sechs Jahre früher mit Mühe gestillt; doch war das
Landvolk hie und da noch schwierig, weil der Herzog sie nicht für sich
zu gewinnen wußte, seine Amtleute auf ihre eigene Faust arg hausten
und Steuern auf Steuern erhoben wurden. Den schwäbischen Bund, eine
mächtige Vereinigung von Fürsten, Grafen, Rittern und freien Städten
des Schwaben- und Frankenlandes, hatte er wiederholt beleidigt,
hauptsächlich auch dadurch, daß er sich weigerte, ihm beizutreten. So
sahen also alle seine Grenznachbarn mit feindlichen Blicken auf sein
Tun, als wollten sie nur Gelegenheit abwarten, ihn fühlen zu lassen,
welch mächtiges Bündnis er verweigert habe. Der Kaiser Maximilian, der
damals noch regierte, war ihm auch nicht ganz hold, besonders seit er
im Verdacht war, den Ritter Götz von Berlichingen unterstützt zu haben,
um sich an dem Kurfürsten von Mainz zu rächen.

Der Herzog von Bayern, ein mächtiger Nachbar, dazu sein Schwager, war
ihm abgeneigt, weil Ulrich mit der Herzogin Sabina nicht zum besten
lebte. Zu allem diesem kam, um sein Verderben zu beschleunigen,
die Ermordung eines fränkischen Ritters, der an seinem Hofe lebte.
Glaubwürdige Chronisten sagen, das Verhältnis des Johann von Hutten zu
Sabina sei nicht so gewesen, wie es der Herzog gern sah. Daher griff
ihn der Herzog auf einer Jagd an, warf ihm seine Untreue vor, forderte
ihn auf, sich seines Lebens zu erwehren, und stach ihn nieder. Die
Huttischen, hauptsächlich Ulrich von Hutten, erhoben ihre Stimmen wider
ihn, und in ganz Deutschland erscholl ihr Klage- und Rachegeschrei.

Auch die Herzogin, die durch stolzes, zänkisches Wesen Ulrich schon
als Braut aufgebracht und ihm keine gute Ehe bereitet hatte, trat
jetzt als Gegnerin auf, entfloh mit Hilfe Dietrichs von Spät, und sie
und ihre Brüder traten als Kläger und bittere Feinde bei dem Kaiser
auf.[3] Es wurden Verträge geschlossen und nicht gehalten, es wurden
Friedensvorschläge angeboten und wieder verworfen, die Not um den
Herzog wuchs von Monat zu Monat, und dennoch beugte sich sein Sinn
nicht, denn er meinte, recht getan zu haben. Der Kaiser starb in dieser
Zeit. Er war ein Herr, der Ulrich trotz der vielen Klagen dennoch Milde
bewiesen hatte. An ihm starb dem Herzog ein unparteiischer Richter,
den er in diesen Bedrängnissen so gut hätte brauchen können, denn das
Unglück kam jetzt schnell.

Man feierte das Leichenfest des Kaisers zu Stuttgart in der Burg, als
dem Herzog Kunde kam, daß Reutlingen, eine Reichsstadt, die in seinem
Gebiete lag, seinen Waldvogt auf Achalm erschlagen habe. Diese Städtler
hatten ihn schon oft empfindlich beleidigt, sie waren ihm verhaßt und
sollten jetzt seine Rache fühlen. Schnell zum Zorn gereizt, wie er war,
warf er sich aufs Pferd, ließ die Lärmtrommeln tönen durch das Land,
belagerte die Stadt und nahm sie ein. Der Herzog ließ sich von ihnen
huldigen, und die Reichsstadt war württembergisch.[4]

Aber jetzt erhob sich der schwäbische Bund mit Macht, denn diese Stadt
war ein Glied desselben gewesen. So schwer es auch sonst hielt, diese
Fürsten, Grafen und Städte alle aufzubieten, so weilten sie doch hier
nicht, sondern hielten zusammen, denn der Haß ist ein fester Kitt.
Umsonst waren Ulrichs schriftliche Verteidigungen.[5] Das Bundesheer
sammelte sich bei Ulm und drohte mit einem Einfall.

So war also in dem Jahr 1519 alles auf die Spitze gestellt. Konnte
der Herzog das Feld behaupten, so behielt er recht, und es war nicht
zu zweifeln, daß er dann großen Anhang bekommen würde. Gelang es dem
Bunde, den Herzog aus dem Felde zu schlagen, dann wehe ihm. Wo so
vieles zu rächen war, durfte er keine Schonung erwarten.

Die Blicke Deutschlands hingen bange an dem Erfolg dieses Kampfes,
sie suchten begierig durch den Vorhang des Schicksals zu dringen, um
zu erspähen, was die künftigen Tage bringen werden, ob Württemberg
gesiegt, ob der Bund den Walplatz behauptet habe. Wir rollen diesen
Vorhang auf, wir lassen Bild an Bild vorüberziehen, möge das Auge nicht
zu frühe ermüdet sich davon abwenden.

Oder sollte es ein zu kühnes Unternehmen sein, eine historische Sage
der Vorzeit in unsern Tagen wieder zu erzählen? Sollte es unbillig
sein zu wünschen, daß sich die Aufmerksamkeit der Leser einige kurze
Stunden nach den Höhen der schwäbischen Alb und nach den lieblichen
Tälern des Neckars wende?

Die Quellen des Susquehannah und die malerischen Höhen von Boston, die
grünen Ufer des Tweed und die Gebirge des schottischen Hochlandes,
Altenglands lustige Sitten und die romantische Armut der Gälen leben,
Dank sei es dem glücklichen Pinsel jener berühmten Novellisten, auch
bei uns in aller Munde. Begierig liest man in getreuen Uebertragungen,
die wie Pilze aus der Erde zu wachsen scheinen, was vor sechzig oder
sechshundert Jahren in den Gefilden von Glasgow oder in den Wäldern von
Wallis sich zugetragen. Ja, wir werden bald die Geschichte der drei
Reiche so genau innehaben, als hätten wir sie nach den gelehrtesten
Forschungen ergründet. Und doch ist es meist nur der große Unbekannte,
der uns die Bücher seiner Chroniken erschloß und Bild an Bild in
unendlicher Reihe vor dem staunenden Auge vorüberführte; er ist es,
der diesen Zauber bewirkte, daß wir in Schottlands Geschichte beinahe
besser bewandert sind als in der unsrigen, und daß wir die religiösen
und weltlichen Händel unserer Vorzeit bei weitem nicht so deutlich
kennen als die Presbyterianer und Episkopalen Albions.

Und in was besteht der Zauber, womit jener unbekannte Magier unsere
Blicke und unsere Herzen nach den  bergigten Heiden  seines Vaterlandes
zog? Vielleicht in der ungeheuren Masse dessen, was er erzählt, in
der grauenvollen Anzahl von hundert Bänden, die er uns über den Kanal
schickte? Aber auch wir haben mit Gottes und der Leipziger Messen
Hilfe Männer von achtzig, hundert und hundertundzwanzig! Oder haben
vielleicht die Berge von Schottland ein glänzenderes Grün als der
deutsche Harz, der Taunus und die Höhen des Schwarzwaldes? Ziehen
die Wellen des Tweed in lieblicherem Blau als der Neckar und die
Donau, sind seine Ufer herrlicher als die des Rheins? Sind vielleicht
jene Schotten ein interessanterer Menschenschlag als der, den unser
Vaterland trägt, hatten ihre Väter röteres Blut als die Schwaben und
Sachsen der alten Zeit, sind ihre Weiber liebenswürdiger, ihre Mädchen
schöner als die Töchter Deutschlands? Wir haben Ursache, daran zu
zweifeln, und hierin kann also jener Zauber des Unbekannten nicht
liegen.

Aber darin liegt er wohl, daß jener große Novellist auf historischem
Grund und Boden geht, nicht als ob der unsrige weniger geschichtlich
wäre, aber wir haben ja schon seit Jahrhunderten uns angewöhnt, unter
fremdem Himmel zu suchen, was bei uns selbst blühte, und wie wir die
rohen Stoffe ausführen, um sie in anderer Form mit Bewunderung und
Ehrfurcht als teure Kleinode wieder in unsere Grenzen aufzunehmen, so
bewundern wir jedes Fremde und Ausländische, nicht weil es groß oder
erhaben, sondern weil es nicht in unsern Tälern gewachsen ist.

Doch auch wir hatten eine Vorzeit, die, reich an bürgerlichen Kämpfen,
uns nicht weniger interessant dünkt als die Vorzeit des Schotten. Darum
haben auch wir gewagt, ein historisches Tableau zu entrollen, das, wenn
es auch nicht jene kühnen Umrisse der Gestalten, jenen zauberischen
Schmelz der Landschaft aufweist, und wenn das an solche Herrlichkeiten
gewöhnte Auge umsonst die süße, bequeme Magie der Hexerei und den
von Zigeunerhand geschürzten Schicksalsknoten darin sucht, ja wenn
sogar unsere Farben matt, unser Crayon stumpf erscheint, doch eines
zur Entschuldigung für sich haben möchte, ich meine die historische
Wahrheit.




1.

    Was soll doch dies Trommeten sein?
    Was deutet dies Geschrei?
    Will treten an das Fensterlein,
    Ich ahne, was es sei.

            _Uhland._


Nach den ersten trüben Tagen des März 1519 war endlich am zwölften ein
recht freundlicher Morgen über der Reichsstadt Ulm aufgegangen. Die
Donaunebel, die um diese Jahreszeit immer noch drückend über der Stadt
liegen, waren schon lange vor Mittag der Sonne gewichen, und immer
freier und weiter wurde die Aussicht in die Ebene über den Fluß hinüber.

Aber auch die engen kalten Straßen mit ihren hohen dunkeln
Giebelhäusern hatte der schöne Morgen heller als sonst beleuchtet
und ihnen einen Glanz, eine Freundlichkeit gegeben, die zu dem
heutigen festlichen Ansehen der Stadt gar trefflich paßte. Die große
Herdbruckergasse -- sie führt von dem Donautor an das Rathaus -- stand
an diesem Morgen gedrängt voll Menschen, die sich Kopf an Kopf wie eine
Mauer an den beiden Seiten der Häuser hinzogen, nur einen engen Raum
in der Mitte der Gasse übrig lassend. Ein dumpfes Gemurmel gespannter
Erwartung lief durch die Reihen und brach nur in ein kurzes Gelächter
aus, wenn etwa die alten, strengen Stadtwächter eine hübsche Dirne,
die sich zu vorlaut in den freigelassenen Raum gedrängt hatte, etwas
unsanft mit dem Ende ihrer langen Hellebarde zurückdrängten oder wenn
ein Schalk sich den Spaß machte,  sie kommen! sie kommen!  rief, alles
lange Hälse machte und schaute, bis es sich zeigte, daß man sich wieder
getäuscht habe.

Noch dichter aber war das Gedränge da, wo die Herdbruckergasse auf
den Platz vor dem Rathaus einbiegt. Dort hatten sich die Zünfte
aufgestellt. Die Schiffergilde mit ihren Altmeistern an der Spitze, die
Weber, die Zimmerer, die Bräuer, mit ihren Fahnen und Gewerbzeichen,
sie alle waren im Sonntagwams und wohlbewaffnet zahlreich dort
versammelt.

Bot aber schon die Menge hier unten einen fröhlichen, festlichen
Anblick dar, so war dies noch mehr der Fall mit den hohen Häusern
der Straße selbst. Bis an die Giebeldächer waren alle Fenster voll
geputzter Frauen und Mädchen, um welche sich die grünen Tannen- und
Taxuszweige, die bunten Teppiche und Tücher, mit welchen die Seiten
geschmückt waren, wie Rahmen um liebliche Gemälde zogen.

Das anmutigste Bild gewährte wohl ein Erkerfenster im Hause des Herrn
Hans von Besserer. Dort standen zwei Mädchen, so verschieden an
Gesicht, Gestalt und Kleidung, und doch beide von so ausgezeichneter
Schönheit, daß, wer sie von der Straße betrachtete, eine Weile
zweifelhaft war, welcher er wohl den Vorzug geben möchte.

Beide schienen nicht über achtzehn Jahre zu haben. Die eine, größere,
war zart gebaut, reiches braunes Haar zog sich um eine freie Stirne,
die gewölbten Bogen ihrer dunkeln Brauen, das ruhige blaue Auge, der
fein geschnittene Mund, die zarten Farben der Wangen -- sie gaben ein
Bild, das unter unsern heutigen Damen für sehr anziehend gelten würde,
das aber in jenen Zeiten, wo noch höheren Farben, volleren Formen der
Apfel zuerkannt wurde, nur durch seine gebietende Würde neben der
andern Schönen sich geltend machen konnte.

Diese, kleiner und in reichlicherer Fülle als ihre Nachbarin, war
eines jener unbesorgten, immer heiteren Wesen, welche wohl wissen, daß
sie gefallen. Ihr hellblondes Haar war nach damaliger Sitte der Ulmer
Damen in viele Löckchen und Zöpfchen geschlungen und zum Teil unter ein
weißes Häubchen voll kleiner künstlicher Fältchen gesteckt. Das runde
frische Gesichtchen war in immerwährender Bewegung, noch rastloser
glitten die lebhaften Augen über die Menge hin, und der lächelnde Mund,
der alle Augenblicke die schönen Zähne sehen ließ, zeugt deutlich, daß
es unter den vielerlei abenteuerlichen Gruppen und Gestalten nicht an
Gegenständen fehle, die ihrer fröhlichen Laune zur Zielscheibe dienen
mußten.

Hinter den beiden Mädchen stand ein großer bejahrter Mann; seine
tiefen strengen Züge, seine buschigen Augenbrauen, sein langer dünner,
schon ins Graue spielender Bart, selbst sein ganz schwarzer Anzug, der
wunderlich gegen die reichen bunten Farben um ihn her abstach, gaben
ihm ein ernstes, beinahe trauriges Aussehen, das kaum ein wenig milder
wurde, wenn ein Schimmer von Freundlichkeit, hervorgelockt durch die
glücklichen Einfälle der Blondine, wie ein Wetterleuchten durch das
finstere Gesicht zog. Diese Gruppe, so verschieden in sich durch Farbe
und Schattierung wie durch Charakter und Jahre, zog hin und wieder
die Aufmerksamkeit der Untenstehenden auf sich. Manches Auge hing
an den schönen Mädchen, und sie beschäftigten eine Weile durch ihre
überraschende Erscheinung jene müßige Menge, die schon ungeduldig zu
werden anfing, daß das Schauspiel, dessen sie harrte, noch immer sich
nicht zeigen wollte.

Es ging schon stark auf Mittag. Die Menge wogte immer ungeduldiger,
preßte sich stärker, und hin und wieder hatte sich schon einer oder der
andere aus den Reihen der ehrsamen Zünfte auf den Boden gelagert, da
tönten drei Stückschüsse von der Schanze auf dem Lug-ins-Land herüber,
die Glocken des Münsters begannen tiefe volle Akkorde über die Stadt
hinzurollen, und im Augenblick hatten sich die verworrenen Reihen
geordnet.

 Sie kommen, Marie, sie kommen!  rief die Blonde im Erkerfenster und
schlang ihren Arm um den Leib ihrer Nachbarin, indem sie sich weiter
zum Fenster hinausbeugte. Das Haus des Herrn von Besserer bildete die
Ecke der vorerwähnten Straße, von dem Erker konnte man hinab, beinahe
bis an das Donautor, und hinüber bis in die Fenster des Rathauses
sehen, und die Mädchen hatten also ihren Standpunkt trefflich gewählt,
um das Schauspiel, dessen sie harrten, ganz zu genießen.

Die Gasse zwischen den beiden Reihen des Volkes war indes mit Mühe
weiter gemacht worden, die Stadtwächter stellten sich mit weit
ausgestreckten Hellebarden auf, tiefe Stille herrschte unter der
ungeheuren Menge, nur das Geläute der Glocken tönte noch fort.

Jetzt hörte man den dumpfen Schall der Pauken, vermischt mit den hohen
Klängen der Zinken und Trompeten, und durch das Tor herein bewegte sich
ein langer glänzender Zug von Reitern. Die Stadtpauker und Trompeter,
die berittene Schar der Ulmer Patriziersöhne war eine zu alltägliche
Erscheinung, als daß das Auge lange darauf verweilt hätte. Als aber das
schwarze und weiße Banner der Stadt, mit dem Reichsadler, als Fahnen
und Standarten aller Größen und Farben zum Tor hereinschwankten, da
dachten die Zuschauer, daß jetzt der rechte Augenblick gekommen sei.

Auch unsere Schönen im Erkerfenster schärften jetzt ihre Blicke, als
man die Menge am untern Teil der Straße ehrerbietig die Mützen abnehmen
sah.

Auf einem großen starkknochigen Rosse nahte ein Mann, dessen kräftige
Haltung, dessen heiteres, frisches Ansehen in sonderbarem Kontrast
stand mit der tiefgefurchten Stirne und dem schon ins Graue
spielenden Haar und Bart. Er trug einen zugespitzten Hut mit vielen
Federn, einen Brustharnisch über ein eng anschließendes rotes Wams,
Beinkleider von Leder, mit Seide ausgeschlitzt, die wohl von neuem
recht hübsch gewesen sein mochten, aber durch Regen und Strapazen
eine einförmige dunkelbraune Farbe erhalten hatten. Weite schwere
Reiterstiefel schlossen sich unter den Knieen an. Seine einzige Waffe,
ein ungewöhnlich großes Schwert mit langem Griffe ohne Korb, vollendete
das Bild eines gewaltigen, unter Gefahren früh ergrauten Kriegers. Der
einzige Schmuck dieses Mannes war eine lange goldene Kette von dicken
Ringen, fünfmal um den Hals gelegt, an welcher ein Ehrenpfennig von
gleichem Metall auf die Brust herabhing.

 Sagt geschwind, Oheim, wer ist der stattliche Mann, der so jung und
alt aussieht?  rief die Blonde, indem sie das Köpfchen ein wenig nach
dem schwarzen Herrn, der hinter ihr stand, zurückbeugte.

 Das kann ich dir sagen, Bertha,  antwortete dieser.  Es ist Georg von
Frondsberg[6], oberster Feldhauptmann des bündischen Fußvolkes, ein
wackerer Mann, wenn er einer bessern Sache diente! 

 Behaltet Eure Bemerkungen für Euch, Herr Württemberger,  entgegnete
ihm die Kleine, indem sie lächelnd mit dem Finger drohte,  Ihr wißt,
daß die Ulmer Mädchen gut bündisch sind! 

Der Oheim aber, ohne sich irre machen zu lassen, fuhr fort:  Jener dort
auf dem Schimmel ist Truchseß Waldburg, der Feldleutnant[7], dem auch
etwas von unserem Württemberg wohl anstünde. Dort hinter ihm kommen
die Bundesobersten. Weiß Gott, sie sehen aus wie Wölfe, die nach Beute
gehen. 

 Pfui! verwitterte Gestalten!  bemerkte Bertha,  ob es wohl auch der
Mühe wert war, Bäschen Marie, daß wir uns so putzten? Aber siehe da,
wer ist der junge schwarze Reiter auf dem Braunen? Sieh nur das bleiche
Gesicht und die feurigen, schwarzen Augen! Auf seinem Schilde steht:
_Ich hab's gewagt._ 

 Das ist der Ritter Ulrich von Hutten,  erwiderte der Alte,  dem Gott
seine Schmähworte gegen unsern Herzog verzeihen wolle. Kinder! das ist
ein gelehrter, frommer Herr. Er ist zwar des Herzogs bitterster Feind,
aber ich sage so. Denn was wahr ist, muß wahr bleiben![8]

Und siehe, da sind Sickingens[9] Farben, wahrhaftig, da ist er selbst.
Schaut hin, Mädchen, das ist Franz von Sickingen. Sie sagen, er führe
tausend Reiter in das Feld. Der ist's mit dem blanken Harnisch und der
roten Feder. 

 Aber sagt mir, Oheim,  fragte Bertha wieder,  welches ist denn Götz
von Berlichingen, von dem uns Vetter Kraft so viel erzählt. Er ist ein
gewaltiger Mann und hat eine Faust von Eisen. Reitet er nicht mit den
Städten? 

 Götz und die Städtler nenne nie in _einem_ Atem,  sprach der Alte mit
Ernst.  Er hält zu Württemberg. [10]

Ein großer Teil des Zuges war während diesem Gespräch am Fenster
vorübergezogen, und mit Verwunderung hatte Bertha bemerkt, wie
gleichgültig und teilnahmlos ihre Base Marie hinabschaute. Es war
zwar sonst des Mädchens Art, sinnend, zuweilen wohl auch träumend
auszusehen, aber heute, bei einem so glänzenden Aufzug, so ganz
ohne Teilnahme zu sein, deuchte ihr ein großes Unrecht. Sie wollte
sie eben zur Rede stellen, als ein Geräusch von der Straße her ihre
Aufmerksamkeit auf sich zog. Ein mächtiges Roß bäumte sich in der
Mitte der Straße unter ihrem Fenster, wahrscheinlich scheu gemacht
durch die flatternden Fahnen der Zünfte. Sein hoch zurückgeworfener
Kopf verdeckte den Reiter, so daß nur die wehenden Federn des Baretts
sichtbar waren; aber die Gewandtheit und Kraft, mit welcher er das
Pferd herunterriß und zum Stehen brachte, ließ einen jungen mutigen
Reiter ahnen. Das lange hellbraune Haar war ihm von der Anstrengung
über das Gesicht herabgefallen. Als er es zurückschlug, traf sein Blick
das Erkerfenster.

 Nun, dies ist doch einmal ein hübscher Herr,  flüsterte die Blonde
ihrer Nachbarin zu, so heimlich, so leise, als fürchte sie, von dem
schönen Reiter gehört zu werden,  und wie er artig und höflich ist!
Sieh nur, er hat uns gegrüßt, ohne uns zu kennen! 

Aber das stille Bäschen Marie schien der Kleinen nicht viel
Aufmerksamkeit zu schenken. Ein glühendes Rot zog über die zarten
Wangen. Ja! wer die ernste Jungfrau gesehen hätte, wie sie so kalt
auf den Zug hinabsah, hätte wohl nie geahnet, daß so viel holde
Freundlichkeit um diesen Mund, so viel Liebe in diesem sinnenden Auge
wohnen könnte, als in jenem Augenblick sichtbar wurde, wo sie durch ein
leichtes Neigen des Hauptes den Gruß des jungen Reiters erwiderte.

Der kleinen Schwätzerin war unsere flüchtige, aber wahre Bemerkung über
dem Anblick des schönen Mannes völlig entgangen.  Nur schnell, Oheim! 
rief sie und zog den alten Herrn am Mantel,  wer ist dieser in der
hellblauen Binde mit Silber? Nun? 

 Ja, liebes Kind!  antwortete der Oheim,  den habe ich in meinem Leben
nicht gesehen. Seinen Farben nach steht er in keinem besondern Dienst,
sondern reitet wohl auf seine eigene Faust gegen meinen Herzog und
Herrn, wie so viele Hungerleider, die sich an unsern Töpfen laben
wollen. 

 Mit Euch ist doch nichts anzufangen,  sagte die Kleine und wandte
sich unmutig ab.  Die alten und gelehrten Herren kennet Ihr alle auf
hundert Schritte und weiter. Wenn man aber einmal nach einem hübschen,
höflichen Junker fragt, wißt Ihr nichts. Du bist auch so, Marie,
machtest Augen auf den Zug hinunter, als ob es eine Prozession am
Fronleichnam wäre; ich wette, du hast das Schönste von allem nicht
gesehen und hattest noch den alten Frondsberg im Kopfe, als ganz andere
Leute vorbeiritten! 

Der Zug hatte sich während dieser Strafrede Berthas vor dem Rathause
aufgestellt; die bündische Reiterei, die noch vorüberzog, hatte wenig
Interesse mehr für die beiden Mädchen. Als daher die Herren abgesessen
und zum Imbiß ins Rathaus gezogen waren, als die Zünfte ihre Glieder
auflösten und das Volk sich allmählich zu verlaufen begann, zogen auch
sie sich vom Fenster zurück.

Bertha schien nicht ganz zufrieden zu sein. Ihre Neugier war nur halb
befriedigt. Sie hütete sich übrigens wohl, vor dem alten ernsten Oheim
etwas merken zu lassen. Als aber dieser das Gemach verließ, wandte sie
sich an ihre Base, die noch immer träumend am Fenster stand:

 Nein, wie einen doch so etwas peinigen kann! Ich wollte viel darum
geben, wenn ich wüßte, wie er heißt. Daß du aber auch gar keine Augen
hast, Marie! Ich stieß dich doch an, als er grüßte. Siehe, hellbraune
Haare, recht lang und glatt, freundliche dunkle Augen, das ganze
Gesicht ein wenig bräunlich, aber hübsch, sehr hübsch. Ein Bärtchen
über dem Mund, nein! ich sage dir -- wie du jetzt nur wieder gleich
rot werden kannst!  fuhr die Blonde in ihrem Eifer fort,  als ob zwei
Mädchen, wenn sie allein sind, nicht von dem schönen Mund eines jungen
Herrn sprechen dürften. Dies geschieht oft bei uns. Aber freilich bei
deiner seligen Frau Muhme in Tübingen und bei deinem ernsten Vater in
Lichtenstein kamen solche Sachen nicht zur Sprache, und ich sehe schon,
Bäschen Marie träumt wieder, und ich muß mir ein Ulmer Stadtkind
suchen, wenn ich auch nur ein klein wenig schwatzen will. 

Marie antwortete nur durch ein Lächeln, das wir vielleicht etwas
schelmisch gefunden hätten. Bertha aber nahm den großen Schlüsselbund
vom Haken an der Türe, sang sich ein Liedchen und ging, um noch einiges
zum Mittagessen zu rüsten. Denn wenn man ihr auch etwas zu große
Neugierde vorwerfen konnte, so war sie doch eine zu gute Haushälterin,
als daß sie über der flüchtigen Erscheinung des höflichen Reiters das
Zugemüse und den Nachtisch vergessen hätte.

Sie hüpfte hinaus und ließ ihre Base allein bei ihren Gedanken. Und
auch wir stören sie nicht, wenn sie jetzt die schönen Bilder der
Erinnerung durchgeht, die jene Erscheinung mit einem Male aus dem
tiefen, treuen Herzen hervorgerufen hatte, wenn sie jener Zeit gedenkt,
wo ein flüchtiger Blick von ihm, ein Druck seiner Hand ihre Tage
erhellte, wenn sie jener Nächte gedenkt, wo sie im stillen Kämmerlein,
unbelauscht von der seligen Muhme, jene Schärpe flocht, deren freudige
Farben sie heute aus ihren Träumen weckten. Wir lauschen nicht, wenn
sie errötend und mit niedergeschlagenen Augen sich fragt, ob Bäschen
Bertha den süßen Mund des Geliebten richtig beschrieben habe?




2.

    Steigt deine Hoffnung wieder?
    Ist nicht dein Herz entbrannt?
    Du fühlst dich, Jüngling, wieder
    Im alten Schwabenland.

            _G. Schwab._


Der festliche Aufzug, den wir auf den letzten Blättern beschrieben
haben, galt den Häuptern und Obersten des schwäbischen Bundes, der an
diesem Tage, auf seinem Marsch von Augsburg, wo er sich versammelt
hatte, in Ulm einzog. Der Leser kennt aus der Einleitung die Lage der
Dinge. Herzog Ulrich von Württemberg hatte durch die Unbeugsamkeit, mit
welcher er trotzte, durch die allzu heftigen Ausbrüche seines Zornes
und seiner Rache, durch die Kühnheit, mit welcher er, der einzelne,
so vielen verbündeten Fürsten und Herren die Stirne bot, zuletzt noch
durch die plötzliche Einnahme der Reichsstadt Reutlingen den bittersten
Haß des Bundes auf sich gezogen. Der Krieg war unvermeidlich; denn es
stand nicht zu erwarten, daß man Ulrich, nachdem man so weit gegangen,
friedliche Vorschläge tun werde.

Hiezu kamen noch die besonderen Rücksichten, die jeden leiteten.
Der Herzog von Bayern, um seiner Schwester Sabina Genugtuung zu
verschaffen, die Schar der Huttischen, um ihren Stammesvetter zu
rächen, Dietrich von Spät[11] und seine Gesellen, um ihre Schmach
in Württembergs Unglück abzuwaschen, die Städte und Städtchen, um
Reutlingen wieder gut bündisch zu machen, sie alle hatten ihre Banner
entrollt und sich mit blutigen Gedanken und lüstern nach gewisser Beute
eingestellt.

Bei weitem friedlicher und fröhlicher waren bei diesem Einzug die
Gesinnungen _Georgs von Sturmfeder_, jenes  artigen Reiters , der
Berthas Neugierde in so hohem Grade erweckt, dessen unerwartete
Erscheinung Mariens Wangen mit so tiefem Rot gefärbt hatte. Wußte er
doch kaum selbst, wie er zu diesem Feldzug kam, da er, obgleich den
Waffen nicht fremd, doch nicht zunächst für das Waffenwerk bestimmt
war. Aus einem armen, aber angesehenen Stamme Frankens entsprossen,
war er, frühe verwaist, von einem Bruder seines Vaters erzogen worden.
Schon damals hatte man angefangen, gelehrte Bildung als einen Schmuck
des Adels zu schätzen. Daher wählte sein Oheim für ihn diese Laufbahn.
Die Sage erzählt nicht, ob er auf der hohen Schule in Tübingen, die
damals in ihrem ersten Erblühen war, in Wissenschaften viel getan.
Es kam nur die Nachricht bis auf uns, daß er einem Fräulein von
Lichtenstein, die bei einer Muhme in jener Musenstadt lebte, wärmere
Teilnahme schenkte als den Lehrstühlen der berühmtesten Doktoren. Man
erzählt sich auch, daß das Fräulein mit ernstem, beinahe männlichem
Geiste alle Künste, womit andere ihr Herz bestürmten, gering geachtet
habe. Zwar kannte man schon damals alle jene Kriegslisten, ein hartes
Herz zu erobern; und die Jünger der alten Tubinga hatten ihren Ovid
vielleicht besser studiert als die heutigen. Es sollen aber weder
nächtliche Liebesklagen noch fürchterliche Schlachten und Kämpfe um
ihren Besitz die Jungfrau erweicht haben. Nur _einem_ gelang es, dieses
Herz für sich zu gewinnen, und dieser _eine_ war Georg. Sie haben
zwar, wie es stille Liebe zu tun pflegt, niemand gesagt, wann und wo
ihnen der erste Strahl des Verständnisses aufging, und wir sind weit
entfernt, uns in dieses süße Geheimnis der ersten Liebe eindrängen
zu wollen, oder gar Dinge zu erzählen, die wir geschichtlich nicht
belegen können. Doch können wir mit Grund annehmen, daß sie schon bis
zu jenem Grad der Liebe gediehen waren, wo man, gedrängt von äußeren
Verhältnissen, gleichsam als Trost für das Scheiden, ewige Treue
schwört. Denn als die Muhme in Tübingen das Zeitliche gesegnet und
Herr von Lichtenstein sein Töchterlein zu sich holen ließ, um sie nach
Ulm, wo ihm eine Schwester verheiratet war, zu weiterer Ausbildung zu
schicken, da merkte Rose, Mariens alte Zofe, daß so heiße Tränen und
die Sehnsucht, mit welcher Marie noch einmal und immer wieder aus der
Sänfte zurücksah, nicht den bergigen Straßen, denen sie Valet sagen
mußte, _allein_ gelte.

Bald darauf langte auch ein Sendschreiben an Georg an, worin ihm
sein Oheim die Frage beibrachte, ob er jetzt, nach vier Jahren, noch
nicht gelehrt genug sei? Dieser Ruf kam ihm erwünscht. Seit Mariens
Abreise waren ihm die Lehrstühle der gelehrten Doktoren, die finstere
Hügelstadt, ja selbst das liebliche Tal des Neckars verhaßt geworden.
Mit neuer Kraft erfrischte ihn die kalte Luft, die ihm von den Bergen
entgegenströmte, als er an einem schönen Morgen des Februar aus den
Toren Tübingens seiner Heimat entgegenritt. Wie die Sehnen seiner Arme
in dem frischen Morgen sich straffer anzogen, wie die Muskeln seiner
Faust kräftiger in den Zügel faßten, so erhob sich auch seine Seele
zu jenem frischen heiteren Mute, der diesem Alter so eigen ist, wenn
die Gewißheit eines süßen Glückes im Herzen lebt, und vor dem Auge,
das Erfahrung noch nicht geschärft, Unglück noch nicht getrübt hat,
die Zukunft heiter und freundlich sich ausbreitet. Wie der klare See,
der das heitere Bild, das auf ihn herabschaut, nicht minder freundlich
zurückwirft und mit diesen reizenden Farben seine Tiefe verhüllt, so
hat gerade das Ungewisse dieser Zukunft seinen eigentümlichen Reiz. Man
glaubt in Kopf und Arm Kraft genug zu tragen, um dem Glück seine Gunst
abzuringen, und dies Vertrauen auf sich selbst gibt bei weitem mutigere
Zuversicht als die mächtigste Hilfe von außen.

So war die Stimmung Georgs von Sturmfeder, als er durch den
Schönbuchwald seiner Heimat zuzog. Zwar brachte ihn dieser Weg dem
Liebchen nicht näher, zwar konnte er nichts sein nennen als das Roß,
das er eben ritt, und die Burg seiner Väter, von welcher der Volkswitz
sang:

    Ein Haus auf drei Stützen,
    Wer vorn hereinkommt,
    Kann hinten nicht sitzen.

Aber er wußte, daß dem festen Willen hundert Wege offen stehen, um
zum Ziel zu gelangen, und der alte Spruch des Römers: ~Fortes fortuna
juvat~, hatte ihm noch nie gelogen.

Wirklich schienen auch seine Wünsche nach einer tätigen Laufbahn bald
in Erfüllung zu gehen.

Der Herzog von Württemberg hatte Reutlingen, das ihn beleidigt hatte,
aus einer Reichsstadt zur Landstadt gemacht, und es war kein Zweifel
mehr an einem Krieg.

Der Erfolg schien aber damals sehr ungewiß. Der schwäbische Bund, wenn
er auch erfahrenere Feldherren und geübtere Soldaten zählte, hatte doch
in allen Kriegen durch Uneinigkeit sich selbst geschadet. Ulrich, auf
seiner Seite, hatte vierzehntausend Schweizer, tapfere, kampfgeübte
Männer, geworben, aus seinem eigenen Lande konnte er, wenn auch minder
geübte, doch zahlreiche und tüchtige Truppen ziehen, und so stand die
Wage im Februar 1519 noch ziemlich gleich.

Wo alles um ihn her Partei nahm, glaubte Georg nicht müßig bleiben zu
dürfen. Ein Krieg war ihm erwünscht. Es war eine Laufbahn, die ihn
seinem Ziele, um Marie würdig freien zu können, bald nahe bringen
konnte.

Zwar zog ihn sein Herz weder zu der einen, noch zu der andern Partei.
Vom Herzog sprach man im Lande schlecht, des Bundes Absichten schienen
nicht die reinsten. Als aber durch Geld und Klagen der Huttischen und
durch die Aussicht auf reiche Beute bestochen, achtzehn Grafen und
Herren, deren Besitzungen an sein Gütchen grenzten, auf einmal[12] dem
Herzog ihre Dienste aufsagten, da schien es ihn zum Bunde zu ziehen.
Den Ausschlag gab die Nachricht, daß der alte Lichtenstein mit seiner
Tochter in Ulm sich befinde. Auf jener Seite, wo Marie war, durfte er
nicht fehlen, und so bot er dem Bunde seine Dienste an.

Die fränkische Ritterschaft, unter Anführung Ludwigs von Hutten, zog
sich am Anfang des März gegen Augsburg hin, um sich dort mit Ludwig von
Bayern und den übrigen Bundesgliedern zu vereinigen. Bald hatte sich
das Heer gesammelt und ihr Weg glich einem Triumphzug je näher sie dem
Gebiete ihres Feindes kamen.

Herzog Ulrich war bei Blaubeuren, der äußersten Stadt seines Landes
gegen Ulm und Bayern hin, gelagert. In Ulm sollte jetzt noch einmal
zuvor im großen Kriegsrat der Feldzug besprochen werden, und dann
hoffte man in kurzer Zeit die Württemberger zur entscheidenden
Schlacht zu nötigen. An friedliche Unterhandlungen wurde, da man
so weit gegangen war, nicht mehr gedacht, Krieg war die Losung und
Sieg der Gedanke des Heeres, als ein frischer Morgenwind ihnen die
Grüße des schweren Geschützes von den Wällen der Stadt entgegentrug,
als das Geläute aller Glocken zum Willkomm vom andern Ufer der Donau
herübertönte.

Wohl schlug auch Georgs Herz höher bei dem Gedanken an seine erste
Waffenprobe. Aber wer in ähnlicher Lage sich befand, wird ihn nicht
tadeln, daß auch friedlichere Gedanken in seiner Seele aufzogen und
ihn Kampf und Sieg vergessen ließen. Als zuerst, noch in weiter Ferne,
das kolossale Münster aus dem Nebel auftauchte, als nachher der
verhüllende Dunstschleier herabfiel und die Stadt mit ihren dunkeln
Backsteinmauern, mit ihren hohen Tortürmen sich vor seinen Blicken
ausbreitete, da kamen alle Zweifel, die er früher tief in die Brust
zurückgedrängt hatte, schwerer als je über ihn.  Schließen jene Mauern
auch die Geliebte ein? Hat nicht ihr Vater, seinem Herzog treu,
vielleicht in die feindlichen Scharen sich gestellt, und darf der,
dessen ganze Hoffnung darauf beruht, den Vater zu gewinnen, darf er
sich jenem gegenüberstellen, ohne sein ganzes Glück zu vernichten? Und
ist der Vater auf feindlicher Seite, kann Marie möglicherweise noch in
jenen Mauern sein? Und wenn alles gut wäre, wenn unter der festlichen
Menge, die sich zum Anblick des einziehenden Heeres drängt, auch Marie
auf ihn herabschaut, hat sie auch die Treue noch bewahrt, die sie
geschworen?  --

Doch der letzte Gedanke machte bald einer freudigeren Gewißheit Raum;
denn wenn sich auch alles Unglück gegen ihn verschwor, Mariens Treue,
er wußte es, war unwandelbar. Mutig drückte er die Schärpe, die sie
ihm gegeben, an seine Brust, und als jetzt die Ulmer Reiterei sich an
den Zug anschloß, als die Zinken und Trompeten ihre mutigen Weisen
anstimmten, da kehrte seine alte Freudigkeit wieder, stolzer hob er
sich im Sattel, kühner rückte er das Barett in die Stirne, und als der
Zug in die festlich geschmückten Straßen einbog, musterte sein scharfes
Auge alle Fenster der hohen Häuser, um sie zu erspähen.

Da gewahrte er sie, wie sie ernst und sinnend auf das fröhliche Gewühl
hinabsah, er glaubte zu erkennen, wie ihre Gedanken in weiter Ferne
den suchten, der ihr so nahe war; schnell drückte er seinem Pferde die
Sporen in die Seiten, daß es sich hoch aufbäumte und das Pflaster von
seinem Hufschlag ertönte. Aber als sie sich zu ihm herabwandte, als
Auge dem Auge begegnete, als ihr freudiges Erröten dem Glücklichen
sagte, daß er erkannt und noch immer geliebt sei, da war es um die
Besinnung des guten Georg geschehen; willenlos folgte er dem Zuge
vor das Rathaus, und es hätte nicht viel gefehlt, so hätte ihn seine
Sehnsucht alle Rücksichten vergessen lassen und unwiderstehlich zu dem
Eckhaus mit dem Erker hingezogen.

Schon hatte er die ersten Schritte nach jener Seite getan, als er sich
von kräftiger Hand am Arm angefaßt fühlte.

 Was treibt Ihr, Junker?  rief ihm eine tiefe, wohlbekannte Stimme
ins Ohr.  Dort hinauf geht es die Rathaustreppe. Wie? ich glaube, Ihr
schwindelt; wäre auch kein Wunder, denn das Frühstück war gar zu mager.
Seid getrost, Freundchen, und kommt. Die Ulmer führen gute Weine, wir
wollen Euch mit altem Remstaler anstreichen. 

Wenn auch der Fall aus seinem Freudenhimmel, in welchem er einige
Minuten geschwebt hatte, auf den Rathausplatz in Ulm etwas unsanft
war, so wußte er doch dem alten Herrn von Breitenstein, seinem
nächsten Grenznachbar in Franken, Dank, daß er ihn aus seinen Träumen
aufgeschüttelt und von einem übereilten Schritte zurückgehalten hatte.

Er nahm daher freundlich den Arm des alten Herrn und folgte mit ihm
den übrigen Rittern und Herren, die sich von dem scharfen Morgenritte
an der guten Mittagskost, die ihnen die freie Reichsstadt aufgesetzt
hatte, wieder erholen wollten.




3.

    Ich höre rauschende Musik, das Schloß ist
    Von Lichtern hell. Wer sind die Fröhlichen?

            _Schiller_.


Der Saal des Rathauses, wohin die Angekommenen geführt wurden, bildete
ein großes, längliches Viereck. Die Wände und die zu der Größe des
Saales unverhältnismäßig niedere Decke waren mit einem Getäfel von
braunem Holz ausgelegt, unzählige Fenster mit runden Scheiben, worauf
die Wappen der edlen Geschlechter von Ulm mit brennenden Farben gemalt
waren, zogen sich an der einen Seite hin, die gegenüberstehende Wand
füllten Gemälde berühmter Bürgermeister und Ratsherren der Stadt, die
beinahe alle in der gleichen Stellung, die Linke in die Hüfte, die
Rechte auf einen reichbehängten Tisch gestützt, ernst und feierlich auf
die Gäste ihrer Enkel herabsahen. Diese drängten sich in verworrenen
Gruppen um die Tafel her, die, in Form eines Hufeisens aufgestellt,
beinahe die ganze Weite des Saales einnahm. Der Rat und die Patrizier,
die heute im Namen der Stadt die Honneurs machen sollten, stachen in
ihren zierlichen Festkleidern mit den steifen schneeweißen Halskrausen
wunderlich ab gegen ihre bestaubten Gäste, die, in Lederwerk und
Eisenblech gehüllt, oft gar unsanft an die seidenen Mäntelein und
samtenen Gewänder streiften. Man hatte bis jetzt noch auf den Herzog
von Bayern gewartet, der, einige Tage vorher eingetroffen, zu dem
glänzenden Mittagmahl zugesagt hatte; als aber sein Kämmerling seine
Entschuldigung brachte, gaben die Trompeter das ersehnte Zeichen,
und alles drängte sich so ungestüm zur Tafel, daß nicht einmal die
gastfreundliche Ordnung des Rates, der je zwischen zwei Gäste einen
Ulmer setzen wollte, gehörig beobachtet wurde.

Breitenstein hatte Georg auf einen Sitz niedergezogen, den er ihm als
einen ganz vorzüglichen anpries.  Ich hätte Euch,  sagte der alte
Herr,  zu den Gewaltigen da oben, zu Frondsberg, Sickingen, Hutten
und Waldburg setzen können, aber in solcher Gesellschaft kann man den
Hunger nicht mit gehöriger Ruhe stillen. Ich hätte Euch ferner zu den
Nürnbergern und Augsburgern führen können, dort unten, wo der gebratene
Pfau steht -- weiß Gott, sie haben keinen übeln Platz -- aber ich weiß,
daß Euch die Städtler nicht recht behagen, darum habe ich Euch hieher
gesetzt. Schauet Euch hier um, ob dies nicht ein trefflicher Platz
ist? Die Gesichter umher kennen wir nicht, also braucht man nicht viel
zu schwatzen. Rechts haben wir den geräucherten Schweinskopf mit der
Zitrone im Maul, links eine prachtvolle Forelle, die sich vor Vergnügen
in den Schwanz beißt, und vor uns diesen Rehziemer, so fett und zart,
wie auf der ganzen Tafel keiner mehr zu finden ist. 

Georg dankte ihm, daß er mit so viel Umsicht für ihn gesorgt habe, und
betrachtete zugleich flüchtig seine Umgebung. Sein Nachbar rechts war
ein junger, zierlicher Herr von etwa fünfundzwanzig bis dreißig Jahren.
Das frischgekämmte Haar, duftend von wohlriechenden Salben, der kleine
Bart, der erst vor einer Stunde mit warmen Zänglein gekräuselt sein
mochte, ließen Georg, noch ehe ihn die Mundart davon überzeugte, einen
Ulmer Herrn erraten. Der junge Herr, als er sah, daß er von seinem
Nachbar bemerkt wurde, bewies sich sehr zuvorkommend, indem er Georgs
Becher aus einer großen silbernen Kanne füllte, auf glückliche Ankunft
und gute Nachbarschaft mit ihm anstieß und auch die besten Bissen von
den unzähligen Rehen, Hasen, Schweinen, Fasanen und wilden Enten, die
auf silbernen Platten umherstanden, dem Fremdling auf den Teller legte.

Doch diesen konnte weder seines Nachbars zuvorkommende Gefälligkeit
noch Breitensteins ungemeiner Appetit zum Essen reizen. Er war noch
zu sehr beschäftigt mit dem geliebten Bilde, das sich ihm beim Einzug
gezeigt hatte, als daß er die Ermunterungen seiner Nachbarn befolgt
hätte. Gedankenvoll sah er in den Becher, den er noch immer in der Hand
hielt, und glaubte, wenn die Bläschen des alten Weines zersprangen
und in Kreisen verschwebten, das Bild der Geliebten aus dem goldenen
Boden des Bechers auftauchen zu sehen. Es war kein Wunder, daß der
gesellige Herr zu seiner Rechten, als er sah, wie sein Gast, den Becher
in der Hand, jede Speise verschmähe, ihn für einen unverbesserlichen
Zechbruder hielt. Das feurige Auge, das unverwandt in den Becher sah,
der lächelnde Mund des in seine Träume versunkenen Jünglings schienen
ihm einen jener echten Weinkenner anzuzeigen, die auf feingeübter Zunge
den Gehalt des edlen Trankes lange zu prüfen pflegen.

Um der Ermahnung des wohledlen Rates, den Gästen das Mahl so angenehm
als möglich zu machen, gehörig nachzukommen, suchte er auf der
entdeckten schwachen Seite dem jungen Manne beizukommen. Es war zwar
gegen die Gewohnheit des jungen Ulmers, viel Wein zu trinken, aber dem
jungen Mann zulieb, der etwas so Hohes und Gebietendes an sich hatte,
mußte er schon ein übriges tun. Er schenkte sich seinen Becher wieder
voll und begann:  Nicht wahr, Herr Nachbar, das Weinchen hat Feuer und
einen feinen Geschmack? Freilich ist es kein Würzburger, wie Ihr ihn
in Franken gewohnt sein werdet, aber es ist echter Elfinger aus dem
Ratskeller und immer seine achtzig Jahre alt. 

Verwundert über diese Anrede, setzte Georg den Becher nieder und
antwortete mit einem kurzen  Ja, ja! --  der Nachbar ließ aber den
einmal aufgenommenen Faden nicht so bald wieder fallen.  Es scheint, 
fuhr er fort,  als munde er Euch doch nicht ganz; aber da weiß ich Rat.
Heda! gebt eine Kanne Uhlbacher hieher! -- Versuchet einmal diesen, der
wächst zunächst an des Württembergers Schloß; in diesem müßt Ihr mir
Bescheid tun: Kurzen Krieg, großen Sieg! 

Georg, dem dieses Gespräch nicht recht zusagte, suchte seinen Nachbar
auf einen andern Weg zu bringen, der ihn zu anziehenderen Nachrichten
führen konnte.  Ihr habt,  sprach er,  schöne Mädchen hier in Ulm,
wenigstens bei unserem Einzug glaubte ich deren viele zu bemerken. 

 Weiß Gott,  entgegnete der Ulmer,  man könnte damit pflastern. 

 Das wäre vielleicht so übel nicht,  fuhr Georg fort,  denn das
Pflaster Eurer Straßen ist herzlich schlecht. Aber sagt mir, wer wohnt
dort in dem Eckhaus mit dem Erker; wenn ich nicht irre, schauten dort
zwei feine Jungfrauen heraus, als wir einritten. 

 Habt Ihr diese auch schon bemerkt?  lachte jener.  Wahrhaftig, Ihr
habt ein scharfes Auge und seid ein Kenner. Das sind meine lieben Basen
mütterlicherseits, die kleine Blonde ist eine Besserer, die andere ein
Fräulein von Lichtenstein, eine Württembergerin, die auf Besuch dort
ist. 

Georg dankte im stillen dem Himmel, der ihn gleich mit einem so nahen
Verwandten Mariens zusammenführte. Er beschloß, den Zufall zu benützen,
und wandte sich, so freundlich er nur konnte, zu seinem Nachbar.  Ihr
habt ein Paar hübsche Mühmchen, Herr von Besserer ... 

 Dietrich von Kraft nenne ich mich,  fiel er ein,  Schreiber des großen
Rates. 

 Ein Paar schöne Kinder, Herr von Kraft; und Ihr besuchet sie wohl
recht oft? 

 Jawohl,  antwortete der Schreiber des großen Rates,  besonders seit
die Lichtenstein im Hause ist. Zwar will mein Bäschen Bertha etwas
eifersüchtig werden, denn im Vertrauen gesagt, wir waren vorher ein
Herz und eine Seele, aber ich tue, als merke ich es nicht, und stehe
mit Marien um so besser. 

Diese Nachricht mochte nicht so gar angenehm in Georgs Ohren klingen,
denn er preßte die Lippen zusammen, und seine Wangen färbten sich
dunkler.

 Ja, lachet nur,  fuhr der Ratsschreiber fort, dem der ungewohnte
Geist des Weines zu Kopfe stieg,  wenn Ihr wüßtet, wie sie sich
beide um mich reißen. -- Zwar -- die Lichtenstein hat eine verdammte
Art, freundlich zu sein; sie tut so vornehm und ernst, daß man nicht
recht wagt, in ihrer Gegenwart Spaß zu machen, noch weniger läßt sie
ein wenig mit sich schäkern wie Bertha; aber gerade das kommt mir
so wunderhübsch vor, daß ich elfmal wiederkomme, wenn sie mich auch
zehnmal fortgeschickt hat. Das macht aber,  murmelte er nachdenklicher
vor sich hin,  weil der gestrenge Herr Vater da ist, vor dem scheut
sie sich; laßt nur den einmal über der Ulmer Markung sein, so soll sie
schon kirre werden. 

Georg wollte sich nach dem Vater noch weiter erkundigen, als sonderbare
Stimmen ihn unterbrachen. Schon vorher hatte er mitten durch das
Geräusch der Speisenden diese Stimmen zu hören geglaubt, wie sie in
schleppendem, einförmigem Ton ein paar kurze Sätze hersagten, ohne zu
verstehen, was es war. Jetzt hörte er dieselben Stimmen ganz in der
Nähe, und bald bemerkte er, welchen Inhaltes ihre eintönigen Sätze
waren. Es gehörte nämlich in den guten alten Zeiten, besonders in
Reichsstädten, zum Ton, daß der Hausvater und seine Frau, wenn sie
Gäste geladen hatten, gegen die Mitte der Tafel aufstanden und bei
jedem einzelnen umhergingen, mit einem herkömmlichen Sprüchlein zum
Essen und Trinken zu nötigen.

Diese Sitte war in Ulm so stehend geworden, daß der hohe Rat beschloß,
auch an diesem Mahl keine Ausnahme zu machen, sondern ~ex officio~
einen Hausvater samt Hausfrau aufzustellen, um diese Pflicht zu üben.
Die Wahl fiel auf den Bürgermeister und den ältesten Ratsherrn.

Sie hatten schon zwei Seiten der Tafel  nötigend  umgangen, kein
Wunder, daß ihre Stimmen durch die große Anstrengung endlich rauh und
heiser geworden waren und ihre freundschaftliche Aufmunterung wie
Drohung klang. Eine rauhe Stimme tönte in Georgs Ohr:  Warum esset Ihr
denn nicht, warum trinket Ihr denn nicht?  erschrocken wandte sich der
Gefragte um und sah einen starken großen Mann mit rotem Gesicht; ehe
er noch auf die schrecklichen Töne antworten konnte, begann an seiner
andern Seite ein kleiner Mann mit einer hohen dünnen Stimme:

     So esset doch und trinket satt,
    Was der Magistrat Euch vorgesetzt hat. 

 Hab' ich's doch schon lange gedacht, daß es so kommen würde,  fiel
der alte Breitenstein ein, indem er ein wenig von der Anstrengung, mit
welcher er den Rehziemer bearbeitet hatte, ausruhte.

 Da sitzt er und schwatzt, statt die köstlichen Braten zu genießen, die
uns die Herren in so reichlicher Fülle vorgesetzt haben. 

 Mit Verlaub,  unterbrach ihn Dietrich von Kraft,  der junge Herr ißt
nichts, er ist ein Zechbruder und trefflicher Weinschmecker; hab' ich's
nicht gleich weg gehabt, daß er gerne zu tief ins Glas guckt? Darum
tadle ihn keiner, wenn er sich lieber an den Uhlbacher hält. 

Georg wußte gar nicht, wie er zu dieser sonderbaren Schutzrede kam;
er war im Begriff, sich zu entschuldigen, als ihn ein neuer Anblick
überraschte. Breitenstein hatte sich jetzt über den Schweinskopf mit
der Zitrone im Maul erbarmt, hatte die Zitrone geschickt aus dem Rachen
des Tieres operiert und begann mit großem Behagen und geübter Hand die
weitere Sektion vorzunehmen, da trat der Bürgermeister auch zu ihm, und
eben als er an einem guten Bissen kaute, hub er an:  Warum esset Ihr
denn nicht, warum trinket Ihr denn nicht?  Dieser sah den Nötigenden
mit starren Blicken an, zum Reden hatten seine Sprachorgane keine
Zeit. Er nickte daher mit dem Haupte und deutete auf die Reste des
Rehziemers; der kleine Mann mit der Fistelstimme ließ sich aber nicht
irre machen, sondern sprach freundschaftlichst:

     So esset doch und trinket satt,
    Was der Magistrat Euch vorgesetzt hat. 

So war es nun in den  guten alten Zeiten!  Man konnte sich wenigstens
nicht beklagen, nur zu einem Schauessen geladen worden zu sein. Bald
aber bekam die Tafel eine ganz andere Gestalt. Die großen Schüsseln
und Platten wurden abgetragen und geräumigere Humpen, größere Kannen,
gefüllt mit edlem Wein, aufgesetzt. Die Umtränke und das in Schwaben
schon damals sehr häufige Zutrinken begann, und nicht lange, so äußerte
auch der Wein seine Wirkungen. Dietrich Spät und seine Gesellen sangen
Spottlieder auf Herzog Ulrich und bekräftigten jeden Fluch oder
schlechten Witz, den einer ausbrachte, mit Gelächter oder einem guten
Trunke. Die fränkischen Ritter würfelten um die Güter des Herzogs und
tranken einander das Tübinger Schloß im Weine ab. Ulrich von Hutten
und einige seiner Freunde hielten in lateinischer Sprache eine laute
Kontrovers mit einigen Italienern wegen des Angriffs auf den römischen
Stuhl, den kurz zuvor ein unberühmter Mönch in Wittenberg unternommen
hatte; die Nürnberger, Augsburger und einige Ulmer Herren, die sich
zusammengetan hatten, waren über den Glanz ihrer Republiken in Streit
geraten, und so füllte Gelächter, Gesang, Zanken und der dumpfe Klang
der silbernen und zinnernen Becher den Saal.

Nur am oberen Ende der Tafel herrschte anständigere, ruhigere
Fröhlichkeit. Dort saßen Georg von Frondsberg, der alte Ludwig Hutten,
Waldburg Truchseß, Franz von Sickingen und noch andere ältliche,
gesetzte Herren.

Dorthin wandte jetzt auch der Bundeshauptmann Hans von Breitenstein,
nachdem er sich genugsam gesättiget hatte, seine Blicke und sprach zu
Georg:  Das Lärmen um uns her will mir gar nicht behagen; wie wäre es,
wenn ich Euch jetzt dem Frondsberg vorstellte, wie Ihr in den letzten
Tagen gewünscht habt? 

Georg, dessen Wunsch schon lange war, dem Kriegsobersten bekannt zu
werden, stand freudig auf, um dem alten Freunde zu folgen. Wir werden
ihn nicht tadeln, daß sein Herz bei diesem Gange ängstlicher pochte,
seine Wangen sich höher färbten, seine Schritte, je näher er kam,
ungewisser und zögernder wurden. Wen haben nicht in seiner Jugend, wenn
er einem glänzenden, ruhmbekränzten Vorbild nahte, ähnliche Gefühle
bestürmt? Wem sank da nicht sein eigenes Ich zur Unbedeutendheit
zusammen, während der Gefeierte zum Riesen wuchs? Georg von Frondsberg
galt schon damals für einen der berühmtesten Feldherren seiner Zeit.
Italien, Frankreich und Deutschland erzählten von seinen Siegen, und
die Kriegskunst wird ihn ewig in ihren Annalen nennen, denn er war der
Stifter und Gründer eines geordneten, in Reihen und Gliedern fechtenden
Fußvolkes. Sagen und Chroniken erhielten das Bild dieses Helden bis
auf unsere Tage, und wer gedenkt nicht unwillkürlich jener homerischen
Helden, wenn er von diesem Manne liest:  Er war so stark an Gliedern,
wenn er den Mittelfinger der rechten Hand ausstreckte, daß er damit
den stärksten Mann, so sich steif stellte, vom Platz stoßen, ein
rennendes Pferd beim Zaum ergreifen und stellen, die großen Büchsen und
Mauerbrecher allein von einem Ort zum andern führen konnte?  Zu ihm
führte Breitenstein den Jüngling.

 Wen bringt Ihr uns da, Hans?  rief Georg von Frondsberg, indem er den
hochgewachsenen, schönen, jungen Mann mit Teilnahme betrachtete.

 Seht ihn Euch einmal recht an, werter Herr,  antwortete Breitenstein,
 ob Euch nicht beifällt, in welches Haus er gehören mag? 

Aufmerksamer betrachtete ihn der Feldhauptmann, auch der alte Truchseß
von Waldburg wandte prüfend sein Auge herüber. Georg war schüchtern
und blöde vor diese Männer getreten; aber sei es, daß die freundliche,
zutrauliche Weise Frondsbergs ihm Mut machte, sei es, daß er fühlte,
wie wichtig der Augenblick für ihn sei, er bekämpfte die Scham, den
Blicken so vieler berühmter Männer ausgesetzt zu sein und sah ihnen
entschlossen und mutig ins Gesicht.

 Jetzt, an diesem Blick erkenne ich dich,  sagte Frondsberg und bot ihm
die Hand,  du bist ein Sturmfeder? 

 Georg Sturmfeder,  antwortete der junge Mann,  mein Vater war Burkhard
Sturmfeder, er fiel, wie man mir sagte, in Italien an Eurer Seite. 

 Er war ein tapferer Mann,  sprach der Feldhauptmann, dessen Auge immer
noch sinnend auf Georgs Zügen ruhte,  an manchem warmen Schlachttag
hat er treu zu mir gehalten; wahrlich, sie haben ihn allzu frühe
eingescharrt! Und du,  setzte er freundlicher hinzu,  du hast dich
eingestellt, um seiner Spur zu folgen? Was treibt dich schon so frühe
aus dem Neste, und bist kaum flügg? 

 Ich weiß schon,  unterbrach ihn Waldburg mit rauher, unangenehmer
Stimme;  das Vöglein will sich ein paar Flöckchen Wolle suchen, um das
alte Nest zu flicken! 

Diese rohe Anspielung auf die verfallene Burg seiner Ahnen jagte
eine hohe Glut auf die Wange des Jünglings. Er hatte sich nie seiner
Dürftigkeit geschämt, aber dieses Wort klang so höhnend, daß er sich
zum erstenmal dem reichen Spötter gegenüber recht arm fühlte. Da fiel
sein Blick über Truchseß Waldburg hin durch die Scheiben auf jenes
wohlbekannte Erkerfenster, er glaubte Mariens Gestalt zu erblicken, und
sein alter Mut kehrte wieder,  Ein jeder Kampf hat seinen Preis, Herr
Ritter,  sagte er,  ich habe dem Bund Kopf und Arm angetragen; _was_
mich dazu treibt, kann _Euch_ gleichgültig sein. 

 Nun, nun!  erwiderte jener,  wie es mit dem Arm aussieht, werden wir
sehen, im Kopfe muß es aber nicht so ganz hell sein, da Ihr aus Spaß
gleich Ernst macht. 

Der gereizte Jüngling wollte wieder etwas darauf erwidern, Frondsberg
aber nahm ihn freundlich bei der Hand;  Ganz wie dein Vater, lieber
Junge; nun, du willst zeitlich zu einer Nessel werden.[13] Und wir
werden Leute brauchen, denen das Herz am rechten Flecke sitzt. Daß du
dann nicht der Letzte bist, darfst du gewiß sein. 

Diese wenigen Worte aus dem Munde eines durch Tapferkeit und
Kriegskunst unter seinen Zeitgenossen hochberühmten Mannes übten so
besänftigende Gewalt über Georg, daß er die Antwort, die ihm auf der
Zunge schwebte, zurückdrängte und sich schweigend von der Tafel in ein
Fenster zurückzog, teils um die Obersten nicht weiter zu stören, teils
um sich genauer zu überzeugen, ob die flüchtige Erscheinung, die er
vorhin gesehen, wirklich Marie gewesen sei.

Als Georg die Tafel verlassen hatte, wandte sich Frondsberg zu
Waldburg:  Das ist nicht die Art, Herr Truchseß, wie man tüchtige
Gesellen für unsere Sache gewinnt; ich wette, er ging nicht mit halb
soviel Eifer für die Sache von uns, als er zu uns brachte. 

 Müßt Ihr dem jungen Laffen auch noch das Wort reden?  fuhr jener
auf.  Was braucht es da? Er soll einen Spaß von seinem Obern ertragen
lernen. 

 Mit Verlaub,  fiel ihm Breitenstein ins Wort,  das ist kein Spaß, sich
über unverschuldete Armut lustig zu machen; ich weiß aber wohl, Ihr
seid seinem Vater auch nie grün gewesen. 

 Und,  fuhr Frondsberg fort,  sein Oberer seid Ihr ganz und gar noch
nicht. Er hat dem Bunde noch keinen Eid geleistet, also kann er noch
immer hinreiten, wohin er will; und wenn er auch unter Euren eigenen
Fahnen diente, so möchte ich Euch doch nicht raten, ihn zu hänseln, er
sieht mir nicht danach aus, als ob er sich viel gefallen ließe! 

Sprachlos vor Zorn über den Widerspruch, den er in seinem Leben nie
ertragen konnte, blickte Truchseß den einen und den andern an, mit
so wutvollen Blicken, daß sich Ludwig von Hutten schnell ins Mittel
schlug, um noch ärgeren Streit zu verhüten:  Laßt doch die alten
Geschichten!  rief er.  Ueberhaupt wäre es gut, wir heben die Tafel
auf. Es dunkelt draußen schon stark, und der Wein wird zu mächtig.
Dietrich Spät hat schon zweimal des Württembergers Tod ausgebracht,
und die Franken dort unten sind nur noch nicht einig, ob man seine
Schlösser niederbrennen oder verteilen soll. 

 Laßt sie immer,  lachte Waldburg bitter,  die Herren dürfen ja heute
machen, was sie wollen, Frondsberg wird ihnen doch das Wort reden. 

 Nein,  antwortete Ludwig Hutten,  wenn einer von so etwas reden
darf, bin ich es, als der Bluträcher meines Sohnes; aber ehe noch
der Krieg erklärt ist, müssen solche Reden unterbleiben. Mein Vetter
Ulrich spricht mir auch zu heftig mit den Italienern über den Mönch von
Wittenberg, und er verschwatzt sich zu sehr, wenn er in Zorn gerät.
Laßt uns aufbrechen. 

Frondsberg und Sickingen stimmten ihm bei, sie standen auf, und als die
nächsten um sie her ihrem Beispiel folgten, war der Aufbruch allgemein.




4.

    Wollt ihr wissen, was die Augen sein,
    Womit ich sie sehe durch alle Land'?
    Es sind die Gedanken des Herzens mein,
    Damit schau ich durch die Mauer und Wand.

            _Walther von der Vogelweide._


Georg hatte in dem Fenster, wohin er sich zurückgezogen, nicht so
entfernt gestanden, daß er nicht jedes Wort der Streitenden gehört
hätte. Er freute sich der warmen Teilnahme, mit welcher Frondsberg
sich des unberühmten, verwaisten Jünglings angenommen hatte, zugleich
aber konnte er es sich nicht verbergen, daß sein erster Schritt in
die kriegerische Laufbahn ihm einen mächtigen, erbitterten Feind
zugezogen hatte. Der Truchseß war zu bekannt im Heere wegen seines
unversöhnlichen Stolzes, als daß Georg hätte glauben dürfen, Huttens
vermittelnde und besänftigende Worte haben jede Erinnerung an diesen
Streit verlöscht, und daß Männer von Gewicht wie Waldburg, in solchen
Fällen der vielleicht unschuldigen Ursache ihres Zornes die Schuld
nicht erlassen, war ihm aus manchen Fällen wohl bekannt. Ein leichter
Schlag auf seine Schulter unterbrach seine Gedanken, und er sah, als
er sich umwandte, seinen freundlichen Nebensitzer, den Schreiber des
großen Rats, vor sich.

 Ich wette, Ihr habt Euch noch nach keinem Quartier umgesehen,  sprach
Dietrich von Kraft,  und es möchte Euch auch jetzt etwas schwer werden,
denn es ist bereits dunkel, und die Stadt ist überfüllt. 

Georg gestand, daß er noch nicht daran gedacht habe, er hoffe aber, in
einer der öffentlichen Herbergen noch ein Plätzchen zu bekommen.

 Darauf möchte ich doch nicht so sicher bauen,  entgegnete jener,
 und gesetzt, Ihr fändet auch in einer solchen Schenke einen Winkel,
so dürft Ihr doch sicherlich darauf rechnen, daß Ihr schlecht genug
bedient seid. Aber wenn Euch meine Wohnung nicht zu gering scheint, so
steht sie Euch mit Freuden offen. 

Der gute Ratsschreiber sprach mit so viel Herzlichkeit, daß Georg
nicht Anstand nahm, sein Anerbieten anzunehmen, obgleich er beinahe
befürchtete, die gastfreundliche Einladung möchte seinen Wirt gereuen,
wenn die gute Laune zugleich mit den Dünsten des Weines verflogen sein
werde. Jener aber schien über die Bereitwilligkeit seines Gastes hoch
erfreut; er nahm mit einem herzlichen Handschlag seinen Arm und führte
ihn aus dem Saal.

Der Platz vor dem Rathaus bot indes einen ganz eigenen Anblick
dar. Die Tage waren noch kurz, und die Abenddämmerung war während
der Tafel unbemerkt hereingebrochen, man hatte daher Fackeln und
Windlichter angezündet; ihr dunkelroter Schein erhellte den großen
Raum nur sparsam und spielte in zitternden Reflexen an den Fenstern
der gegenüberstehenden Häuser und auf den blanken Helmen und
Brustharnischen der Ritter. Wildes Rufen nach Pferden und Knechten
scholl aus der Halle des Rathauses, das Klirren der nachschleppenden
Schwerter, das Hin- und Herrennen der vielen Menschen mischte sich in
das Gebell der Hunde, in das Wiehern und Stampfen der ungeduldigen
Rosse, eine Szene, die mehr einem in der Nacht vom Feinde überfallenen
Posten als dem Aufbruch von einem friedlichen Mahle glich.

Ueberrascht blieb Georg unter der Halle stehen. Der Anblick so vieler
fröhlicher Gesichter, der kräftigen Gestalten, die in jugendlichem Mute
ansprengten, kühne Reiterkünste übten und dann singend und jubelnd
in kleinen Haufen abzogen und in der Nacht verschwanden; dieser
nächtliche, flüchtige Anblick erinnerte ihn, wie ungewiß, wie schnell
auch diese Tage vorübergehen werden, wie alle diese fröhlichen Gesellen
dem tiefen Ernste des Krieges entgegenziehen, wie mancher noch ehe der
Frühling völlig herauf ginge, mit seinem Körper den grünenden Rasen
decken werde, wie sie gefallen sein werden, ohne mit ihrem Blute etwas
eingelöst zu haben, als die Träne eines Kameraden und den kurzen Ruhm,
als brave Männer vor dem Feinde geblieben zu sein.

Unwillkürlich streifte sein Auge nach jener Seite hin, wo er seinen
Kampfpreis wußte. Er sah dort viele Leute an den Fenstern stehen, aber
der schwärzliche Rauch der Fackeln, der wie eine Wolke über den Platz
hinzog, verhüllte die Gegenstände wie mit einem Schleier und ließ sie
nur wie ungewisse Schatten sehen; unbefriedigt wandte er sein Auge ab.
 So ist auch meine Zukunft,  sagte er zu sich;  das Jetzt ist helle,
aber wie dunkel, wie ungewiß das Ziel! 

Sein freundlicher Wirt riß ihn aus diesem düstern Sinnen mit der Frage,
wo seine Knechte mit seinen Pferden seien? Wenn der Platz, worauf sie
standen, heller erleuchtet gewesen wäre, so hätte vielleicht der gute
Kraft eine flüchtige, aber brennende Röte, die bei dieser Frage über
Georgs Wangen zog, bemerken können.  Ein junger Kriegsmann,  antwortete
er schnell gefaßt,  muß sich so viel wie möglich selbst zu helfen
wissen, daher habe ich keinen Diener bei mir; mein Pferd aber habe ich
Breitensteins Knechten übergeben. 

Der Ratsschreiber lobte im Weiterschreiten die Strenge des jungen
Mannes gegen sich selbst, gestand aber, daß er, wenn er einmal zu Felde
ziehe, den Dienst nicht so strenge lernen werde. Ein Blick auf sein
zierlich geordnetes Haar und den fein gekräuselten Bart überzeugte
Georg, daß sein Begleiter aus voller Seele spreche, und die zierliche
bequeme Wohnung, in welcher sie bald darauf anlangten, widersprach
diesem Glauben nicht.

Das Hauswesen des Herrn von Kraft war eine sogenannte
Junggesellenwirtschaft, denn Herrn Dietrichs Eltern waren längst
abgeschieden, als er in das Mannesalter und zugleich in seinen
Posten beim großen Rate eintrat. Er hätte sich vielleicht längst um
eine Genossin seiner Herrlichkeit umgesehen, wenn nicht die Anmut
des Junggesellenlebens, der nicht zu verachtende Vorteil, von allen
jungen Damen der Stadt als eine gute Partie (nach heutigen Begriffen)
angesehen und honoriert zu werden, vor allem aber, wie man sich ins
Ohr flüsterte, die entschiedene Abneigung, die seine alte Amme und
Haushälterin vor einer jungen Gebieterin hegte, ihn immer von diesem
Schritte abgehalten hätte.

Herr Dietrich hatte ein großes Haus, nicht weit vom Münster, einen
schönen Garten am Michelsberg, sein Hausgeräte war im besten Stande,
die großen eichenen Kasten voll des köstlichen Linnenzeuges, das
die Kraftinnen und ihre Zofen seit vielen Generationen in den
langen Winterabenden zusammengesponnen hatten; die eiserne Truhe
im Schlafzimmer enthielt eine erkleckliche Anzahl von Goldgülden,
Herr Dietrich selbst war ein hübscher, solider Herr, ging immer
geschniegelt und gebügelt, mit gesetztem, anständigem Gang in den
Rat, hatte einen guten Haus- und Ratsverstand, war aus einer alten
Familie; war es ein Wunder, wenn die ganze Stadt sein Leben pries und
jedes hübsche Ulmer Stadtkind sich glücklich geschätzt hätte, in diesen
bequem ausstaffierten Ehehimmel zu kommen?

Georg kamen übrigens diese Verhältnisse bei näherer Besichtigung
nichts weniger als lockend vor. Die einzigen Hausgenossen des
Ratsschreibers waren ein alter, grauer Diener, zwei große Katzen
und die unförmig dicke Amme. Diese vier Geschöpfe starrten den Gast
mit großen, bedenklichen Augen an, die ihm bewiesen, wie ungewohnt
ihnen ein solcher Zuwachs der Haushaltung sei. Die Katzen umgingen
ihn schnurrend, mit gekrümmtem Rücken, die Amme schob unmutig an der
ungeheuren Buckelhaube von Golddraht und fragte, ob sie für zwei
Personen das Abendessen zurichten solle? Als sie aber nicht nur ihre
Frage bestätigen hörte, sondern auch den Auftrag (man war ungewiß,
war es Bitte oder Befehl) bekam, das Eckzimmer im zweiten Stock für
den Gast zuzurichten, da schien ihre Geduld erschöpft; sie ließ einen
wütenden Blick auf ihren jungen Gebieter schießen und verließ mit
ihrem Schlüsselbund rasselnd das Gemach. Georg hörte noch lange die
hohltönenden Treppen unter ihren schweren Tritten erbeben, und die öde
Stille des großen Hauses gab in vielfältigem Echo das Gepolter der
Türen zurück, welche sie im Grimme hinter sich zuwarf.

Der graue Diener hatte indessen einen Tisch und zwei große Armstühle an
den ungeheuren Ofen gerückt; den Tisch besetzte er mit einem schwarzen
Kasten, stellte zu beiden Seiten desselben ein Licht und einen
silbernen Becher mit Wein und entfernte sich dann, nachdem er einige
leise Worte mit seinem Herrn gewechselt hatte. Herr Dietrich lud seinen
Gast ein, an seiner gewöhnlichen Abendunterhaltung teilzunehmen. Er
öffnete den schwarzen Kasten, es war ein Brettspiel.

Georg graute vor dieser Unterhaltung seines Gastfreundes, als er ihm
erzählte, daß er seit seinem zehnten Jahre alle Abende mit der Amme
an diesem Spiele sich ergötze. Wie öde, wie unheimlich kam ihm das
Haus vor. Das Rennen und Laufen der Amme hatte doch noch an Leben und
Bewegung erinnert, jetzt aber lag Grabesstille über den weiten Gängen
und Gemächern, nur zuweilen vom Knistern der Lichter, vom Ticken des
Holzwurmes im schwärzlichen Getäfel und von dem eintönigen Rollen
der Würfel unterbrochen. Das Spiel hatte nie etwas Anziehendes für
ihn gehabt, seine Gedanken waren auch ferne davon, und die tiefe
Melancholie der öden Gemächer und der Gedanke, nur wenige Straßen von
ihr entfernt, doch den lang ersehnten Anblick der Geliebten entbehren
zu müssen, breitete düstere Schatten über seine Seele. Nur die
ungeheuchelte Freude Herrn Dietrichs, beinahe alle Spiele zu gewinnen,
die seinem gutmütigen Gesicht etwas Angenehmes verlieh, entschädigte
ihn für den Verlust der langsam hinschleichenden Stunden.

Mit dem Schlage der achten Stunde führte Dietrich seinen Gast zum
Abendbrot, das die Amme, trotz ihres Unmutes, trefflich bereitet hatte,
denn sie wollte der Ehre des Kraftischen Hauses nichts vergeben.
Hier öffnete auch der Ratsschreiber wieder die Schleusen seiner
Beredsamkeit, indem er seinem Gaste das Mahl durch Gespräch zu würzen
suchte. Aber umsonst spähete dieser, ob er nicht von seinem schönen
Mühmchen reden werde; nur _eine_ Ausbeute bekam er: Kraft zählte unter
den württembergischen Rittern, die in Ulm anwesend seien, auch den
Ritter von Lichtenstein auf. Doch schon dieses Wort erweckte dankbare
Gefühle gegen die Wendung seines Schicksals in ihm. Jetzt erst freute
er sich, einer Partei beigetreten zu sein, die ihm sonst, außer den
berühmten Namen, die sie an der Spitze trug, ziemlich gleichgültig
war. So aber hatte auch ihr Vater sich in dem Sammelplatze des Heeres
eingefunden, und durfte er auch nicht hoffen, daß ihm das Glück
vergönnen werde, an der Seite des teuren Mannes zu fechten, so trug er
doch die Gewißheit in der Brust, ihm beweisen zu können, daß Georg von
Sturmfeder nicht der letzte Kämpfer im Heere sei.

Der Hausherr führte ihn nach aufgehobener Tafel in sein Schlafgemach
und schied von ihm mit einem herzlichen Glückwunsch für seine Ruhe.
Georg sah sich das Gemach, das man ihm angewiesen hatte, näher an
und fand, daß es ganz zu dem öden Hause passe. Die runden, vom Alter
geblendeten Scheiben der Fenster, das dunkle Täfelwerk an Wand und
Decke, der große, weit vorspringende Ofen, selbst das ungeheure Bette
mit breitem Himmel und steifen schweren Gardinen, sie gewährten ein
düsteres, beinahe trauriges Ansehen. Aber dennoch war alles zu seiner
Bequemlichkeit eingerichtet. Frische, schneeweiße Linnen blinkten ihm
einladend aus dem Bette entgegen, als er die Vorhänge zurückschlug;
der Ofen verbreitete eine angenehme Wärme, eine Nachtlampe war an der
Decke aufgehängt, und selbst der Schlaftrunk, ein Becher wohlgewürzten,
warmen Weines, war nicht vergessen. Er zog die Gardinen vor und
ließ die Bilder des vergangenen Tages an seiner Seele vorüberziehen.
Geordnet und freundlich kamen sie anfangs vorüber, dann aber verwirrten
sie sich, in buntem Gedränge führten sie seine Seele in das Reich der
Träume, und nur ein teures Bild ging ihm heller auf, es war das Bild
der Geliebten.




5.

                -- Ist's kein Wahn?
    Will der Holde, Vielgetreue,
    Dem ich Herz und Leben weihe,
    Heute noch zu Gruß und Kusse nahn?

            _F. Haug._


Georg wurde am anderen Morgen durch ein bescheidenes Pochen an seiner
Türe erweckt. Er schlug die Vorhänge seines Bettes zurück und sah,
daß die Sonne schon ziemlich hoch stehe. Es wurde wieder und stärker
gepocht, und sein freundlicher Wirt, schon völlig im Putz, trat ein.
Nach den ersten Erkundigungen, wie sein Gast geschlafen habe, kam Herr
Dietrich gleich auf die Ursache seines frühen Besuches. Der große Rat
hatte gestern abend noch beschlossen, die Ankunft der Bundesgenossen
auch durch einen Tanz zu feiern, der am heutigen Abend auf dem Rathause
abgehalten werden sollte. Ihm, als dem Ratsschreiber, kam es zu,
alles anzuordnen, was zu dieser Festlichkeit gehörte: er mußte die
Stadtpfeifer bestellen, die ersten Familien feierlich und im Namen
des Rates dazu einladen, er mußte vor allem zu seinen lieben Mühmchen
eilen, um ihnen dieses seltene Glück zu verkündigen.

Er erzählte dies alles mit wichtiger Miene seinem Gaste und versicherte
ihm, daß er vor dem Drang der Geschäfte nicht wisse, wo ihm der Kopf
stehe. Doch Georg hatte nur für _eines_ Sinn; er durfte hoffen, Marien
zu sehen und zu sprechen, und darum hätte er gerne Herrn Dietrich für
seine gute Botschaft an das freudig pochende Herz gedrückt.

 Ich sehe es Euch an,  sagte dieser,  die Nachricht macht Euch Freude,
und die Tanzlust leuchtet Euch schon aus den Augen. Doch Ihr sollt ein
paar Tänzerinnen haben, wie Ihr sie nur wünschen könnt; mit meinen
Bäschen sollt Ihr mir tanzen, denn ich bin ihr Führer bei solchen
Gelegenheiten und werde es schon zu machen wissen, daß Ihr und kein
anderer zuerst sie aufziehen sollet; und wie werden sie sich freuen,
wenn ich ihnen einen so flinken Tänzer verspreche!  Damit wünschte er
seinem Gast einen guten Morgen und ermahnte ihn, wenn er ausgehe, sein
Haus zu merken und das Mittagessen nicht zu versäumen.

Herr Dietrich hatte, als sehr naher Verwandter, schon so frühe am Tag
Zutritt im Hause des Herrn von Besserer, besonders heute, da ihn seine
vielen Geschäfte bei diesem Morgenbesuche entschuldigten.

Er fand die Mädchen noch beim Frühstück. Wohl hätte dort manche
unserer heutigen Damen ein elegantes Dejeuner von gemaltem Porzellan
und den nach den schönsten antiken Vasen geformten Schokoladenbecher
vermißt. Aber wenn es wahr ist, daß natürliche Anmut und Würde auch
im geringsten Kleide sich dem Auge nicht verhüllen, so dürfen wir
schon mit mehr Mut gestehen, daß Marie und die fröhliche Bertha an
jenem Morgen ein Biersüppchen verspeisten. Ob aber dieses Geständnis
der ästhetischen Haltung dieser Damen nicht Eintrag tut? Es mag sein;
wer übrigens Marien und Bertha in dem weißen Morgenhäubchen, in dem
reinlichen Hauskleide gesehen hätte, würde gewiß auch, wie Vetter
Kraft, Verlangen getragen haben, dieses Frühstück mit den holden
Mädchen zu teilen.

 Ich sehe dir es an, Vetter,  begann Bertha,  du möchtest gar zu gerne
von unserer Suppe kosten, weil dir deine Amme heute einen Kinderbrei
vorgesetzt hat; aber schlage dir diese Gedanken nur gleich aus dem
Sinne; du hast Strafe verdient und mußt fasten -- 

 Ach, wie wir so sehnlich auf Euch gewartet haben,  unterbrach sie
Marie.

 Jawohl,  fiel ihr Bertha in die Rede,  aber bilde dir nur nicht
ein, daß wir eigentlich dich erwarteten; nein, ganz allein deine
Neuigkeiten. 

Der Ratsschreiber war schon gewohnt, von Bertha so empfangen zu
werden; er wollte daher, um sie zu versöhnen, daß er nicht gestern
abend noch ihre Neugierde befriedigt habe, seine Nachrichten in desto
längerem Strome geben; aber Bertha unterbrach ihn.  Wir kennen,  sagte
sie,  deine breiten Erzählungen und haben auch das meiste vom Erker
aus selbst mit angesehen; von eurem Trinkgelage, wo es arg genug
hergegangen sein soll, will ich auch nichts wissen, darum antworte
mir auf meine Frage.  Sie stellte sich mit komischem Ernst vor ihn
hin und fuhr fort:  Dietrich von Kraft, Schreiber eines wohledlen
Rates, habt Ihr unter den Bündischen keinen jungen, überaus höflichen
Herrn gesehen, mit langem, hellbraunem Haar, einem Gesicht, nicht so
milchweiß wie das Eure, aber doch nicht minder hübsch, kleinem Bart,
nicht so zierlich wie der Eure, aber dennoch schöner, hellblauer
Schärpe mit Silber ... 

 Ach, das ist kein anderer als mein Gast!  rief Herr Dietrich.  Er ritt
einen großen Braunen, trug ein blaues Wams, an den Schultern geschlitzt
und mit Hellblau ausgelegt? 

 Ja, ja, nur weiter!  rief Bertha.  Wir haben unsere eigenen Ursachen,
uns nach ihm zu erkundigen. 

Marie stand auf und suchte ihr Nähzeug in dem Kasten, indem sie den
beiden den Rücken zukehrte; aber die Röte, die alle Augenblicke auf
ihren Wangen wechselte, ließ ahnen, daß sie kein Wort von Herrn
Dietrichs Erzählung verlor.

 Nun, das ist Georg von Sturmfeder,  fuhr der Ratsschreiber fort;  ein
schöner, lieber Junge. Sonderbar, auch ihr seid ihm gleich beim Einzug
aufgefallen  -- und nun erzählte er, was am Gastmahl vorgegangen sei,
wie ihm der hohe Wuchs, das Gebietende und Anziehende in des Jünglings
Mienen gleich anfangs aufgefallen, wie ihn der Zufall zu seinem Nachbar
gemacht, wie er ihn immer lieber gewonnen und endlich in sein Haus
geführt habe.

 Nun, das ist schön von dir, Vetter,  sagte Bertha, als er geendet
hatte, und reichte ihm freundlich die Hand;  ich glaube, es ist das
erste Mal, daß du es wagst, Gäste zu haben. Aber das Gesicht der alten
Sabine hätte ich sehen mögen, als Junker Dieter so spät noch einen Gast
brachte. 

 O, sie war wie der Lindwurm gegen St. Georg; aber als ich ihr ganz
verblümt zu verstehen gab, es könne wohl geschehen, daß ich bald eine
meiner schönen Basen heimführen würde ... 

 Ach, geh doch!  entgegnete Bertha, indem sie ihm hocherrötend ihre
Hand entreißen wollte; aber Herr Dietrich, dem sein Mühmchen noch nie
so hübsch als in diesem Augenblick geschienen hatte, drückte die weiche
Hand fester, und Mariens ernsteres Bild verlor von Sekunde zu Sekunde
an Gehalt, und die Wagschale der fröhlichen Bertha, die jetzt in holder
Verschämtheit vor ihm saß, stieg hoch in den Augen des glücklichen
Ratsschreibers.

Marie hatte indes schweigend das Gemach verlassen, und Bertha ergriff
mit Freuden diese Gelegenheit, ein anderes Gespräch einzuleiten.

 Da geht sie nun wieder,  sagte sie und sah Marien nach,  und ich
wollte darauf wetten, sie geht in ihre Kammer und weint. Ach, sie hat
gestern wieder so heftig geweint, daß ich auch ganz traurig geworden
bin. 

 Was hat sie nur?  fragte Dietrich teilnehmend.

 Ich habe so wenig wie früher die Ursache ihrer Tränen erfahren,  fuhr
Bertha fort.  Ich habe gefragt und immer wieder gefragt, aber sie
schüttelt dann nur den Kopf, als wenn ihr nicht zu helfen wäre. ›Der
unselige Krieg!‹ war alles, was sie mir zur Antwort gab. 

 So ist der Alte noch immer entschlossen, mit ihr nach Lichtenstein
zurückzugehen? 

 Jawohl,  war Berthas Antwort.  Du hättest nur hören sollen, wie der
alte Mann gestern beim Einzug auf die Bündischen schimpfte. Nun -- er
ist einmal seinem Herzog mit Leib und Seele ergeben, darum mag es ihm
hingehen. Aber sobald der Krieg erklärt ist, will er mit ihr abreisen. 

Herr Dietrich schien sehr nachdenklich zu werden. Er stützte den Kopf
auf die Hand und hörte seiner Muhme schweigend zu.

 Und denke,  fuhr diese fort,  da hat sie nun gestern nach dem Einritte
der Bündischen so heftig geweint. Du weißt, sie war zwar vorher schon
immer ernst und düster, und ich habe sie an manchem Morgen in Tränen
gefunden. Aber als habe schon dieser Einzug über das ganze Schicksal
des Krieges entschieden, so untröstlich gebärdete sie sich. Ich glaube,
Ulm liegt ihr nicht so am Herzen, aber ich vermute,  setzte sie
geheimnisvoll hinzu,  sie hat eine heimliche Liebe im Herzen. 

 Ach freilich, ich habe es schon lange gemerkt,  seufzte Herr Dietrich,
 aber was kann ich denn dafür? 

 Du? Was du dafür kannst?  lachte Bertha, auf deren Gesicht bei diesen
Worten alle Trauer verschwunden war.  Nein! Du bist nicht schuld an
ihrem Schmerz. Sie war schon so, ehe du sie nur mit einem Auge gesehen
hast! 

Der ehrliche Ratsschreiber war sehr beschämt durch diese Versicherung.
Er glaubte in seinem Herzen nicht anders, als der Abschied von ihm gehe
der armen Marie so nahe, und fast schien ihr wehmütiges Bild in seinem
wankelmütigen Herzen wieder das Uebergewicht zu bekommen. Bertha aber
ließ nicht ab, ihn mit seiner törichten Vermutung zu höhnen, bis ihm
auf einmal der Zweck seines Besuches wieder einfiel, den er während
des Gespräches ganz aus den Augen verloren hatte. Sie sprang mit
einem Schrei der Freude auf, als ihr der Vetter die Nachricht von dem
Abendtanz mitteilte.

 Marie, Marie!  rief sie in hellen Tönen, daß die Gerufene, bestürzt
und irgend ein Unglück ahnend, herbeieilte.  Marie, ein Abendtanz
auf dem Rathaus!  rief ihr die beglückte Bertha schon unter der Tür
entgegen.

Auch diese schien freudig überrascht von dieser Nachricht.  Wann?
Kommen auch die Fremden dazu?  waren ihre schnellen Fragen, indem ein
hohes Rot ihre Wangen färbte und aus dem ernsten Auge, das die kaum
geweinten Tränen nicht verbergen konnte, ein Strahl der Freude drang.

Bertha und der Vetter waren erstaunt über den schnellen Wechsel von
Schmerz und Freude, und der letztere konnte die Bemerkung nicht
unterdrücken, daß Marie eine leidenschaftliche Tänzerin sein müsse.
Doch wir glauben, er habe sich hierin nicht weniger geirrt, als wenn er
Georg für einen Weinkenner hielt.

Als der Ratsschreiber sah, daß er jetzt, wo die Mädchen sich in eine
wichtige Beratung über ihren Anzug verwickelten, eine überflüssige
Rolle spiele, empfahl er sich, um seinen wichtigeren Geschäften
nachzugehen. Er beeilte sich, seine Anordnungen zu treffen und die
hohen Gäste und die angesehensten Häuser zu laden. Ueberall erschien er
als ein Bote des Heils, denn wie die Sage erzählt, ist die Freude am
Tanzen nicht erst in unseren Tagen über die Mädchen gekommen.

Auch seine Anordnungen waren bald getroffen. Es war noch nicht zum
Grundsatz geworden, daß man nur in einer langen Reihen von Zimmern,
bei flimmernden Lüstern, umgeben von jenen unzähligen, unwesentlichen
Dingen, welche die Mode als notwendig preist, fröhlich sein könne. Der
Rathaussaal gab hinlänglichen Raum, und die kunstlosen Lampen, die an
den Wänden aufgehängt waren, hatten bisher Helle genug verbreitet, die
schönen Jungfrauen von Ulm in ihrer Pracht zu sehen.

Doch nicht seine Anordnungen allein waren dem Ratsschreiber gelungen,
er hatte nebenbei auch manche geheime Nachricht erspäht, die bis jetzt
nur der engere Ausschuß des Rates mit den Bundesobersten teilte.

Zufrieden mit dem Erfolg seiner vielen Geschäfte, kam er gegen
Mittag nach Hause, und sein erster Gang war, nach seinem Gaste zu
sehen. Er traf ihn in sonderbarer Arbeit. Georg hatte lange in
einem schöngeschriebenen Chronikbuch, das er in seinem Zimmer
gefunden hatte, geblättert. Die reinlich gemalten Bilder, womit die
Anfangsbuchstaben der Kapitel unterlegt waren, die Triumphzüge und
Schlachtenstücke, welche, mit kühnen Zügen entworfen, mit besonderem
Fleiße ausgemalt, hin und wieder den Text unterbrachen, unterhielten
ihn geraume Zeit. Dann fing er an, erfüllt von den kriegerischen
Bildern, die er angeschaut hatte, seinen Helm und Harnisch und das vom
Vater ererbte Schwert zu reinigen und blank zu machen, indem er zu
großem Aergernis der Frau Sabine bald lustige, bald ernstere Weisen
dazu sang.

So traf ihn sein Gastfreund. Schon unten an der Treppe hatte er
die angenehme Stimme des Singenden vernommen. Er konnte sich nicht
enthalten, noch einige Zeit an der Türe zu lauschen, ehe er den Gesang
unterbrach.

Es war eine jener ernsten, beinahe wehmütig tönenden Weisen, wie sie,
durch ihren innern Wert erhalten und fortgetragen, bis auf unsere Tage
herabkamen. Noch heute leben sie in dem Munde der Schwaben, und oft
und gerne haben wir, ergriffen von ihrer einfachen Schönheit, von den
gehaltenen Klängen ihrer vollen Akkorde, an den lieblichen Ufern des
Neckars sie belauscht.

Der Sänger begann von neuem:

     Kaum gedacht,
    War der Lust ein End' gemacht;
    Gestern noch auf stolzen Rossen,
    Heute durch die Brust geschossen,
    Morgen in das kühle Grab.

     Doch was ist
    Aller Erden Freud' und Lüst'!
    Prangst du gleich mit deinen Wangen
    Die wie Milch und Purpur prangen,
    Sieh, die Rosen welken all.

     Darum still
    Geb' ich mich, wie Gott es will.
    Und wird die Trompete blasen,
    Und muß ich mein Leben lassen,
    Stirbt ein braver Reitersmann. 

 Wahrlich, Ihr habt eine schöne Stimme,  sagte Herr von Kraft, als er
in das Gemach eintrat.  Aber warum singt Ihr so traurige Lieder? Ich
kann mich zwar nicht mit Euch messen, aber was ich singe, muß fröhlich
sein, wie es einem jungen Mann von achtundzwanzig geziemt. 

Georg legte sein Schwert auf die Seite und bot seinem Gastfreund die
Hand.  Ihr möget recht haben,  sagte er,  was Euch betrifft. Aber wenn
man zu Feld reitet wie wir, da hat ein solches Lied große Gewalt und
Trost, denn es gibt auch dem Tode eine milde Seite. 

 Nun, das ist ja gerade, was ich meine,  entgegnete der Schreiber
des großen Rates.  Wozu soll man das auch noch in schönen Verslein
besingen, was leider nur zu gewiß nicht ausbleibt? Man soll den Teufel
nicht an die Wand malen, sonst kommt er, sagt ein Sprichwort. Uebrigens
hat es damit keine Not, wie jetzt die Sachen stehen. 

 Wie? Ist der Krieg nicht entschieden?  fragte Georg neugierig.  Hat
der Württemberger Bedingungen angenommen? 

 _Dem_ macht man gar keine mehr,  antwortete Dietrich mit wegwerfender
Miene.  Er ist die längste Zeit Herzog gewesen, jetzt kommt das
Regieren auch einmal an uns. Ich will Euch etwas sagen,  setzte er
wichtig und geheimnisvoll hinzu,  aber bis jetzt bleibt es noch unter
uns. Die Hand darauf. Ihr meint, der Herzog habe 14000 Schweizer? Sie
sind wie weggeblasen. Der Bote, den wir nach Zürich und Bern geschickt
haben, ist zurück. Was von Schweizern bei Blaubeuren und auf der Alb
liegt -- muß nach Haus. 

 Nach Haus zurück?  rief Georg erstaunt.  Haben die Schweizer selbst
Krieg? 

 Nein,  war die Antwort,  sie haben tiefen Frieden, aber kein Geld.
Glaubt mir, ehe acht Tage ins Land kommen, sind schon Boten da, die das
ganze Heer nach Haus zurückrufen. 

 Und werden sie gehen?  unterbrach ihn der Jüngling,  sie sind auf ihre
eigene Faust dem Herzog zu Hilfe gezogen, wer kann ihnen gebieten,
seine Fahnen zu verlassen? 

 Das weiß man schon zu machen. Glaubt Ihr denn, wenn an die Schweizer
der Ruf kommt, bei Verlust ihrer Güter und bei Leib- und Lebensstrafe
nach Haus zu eilen,[14] sie werden bleiben? Ulrich hat zu wenig Geld,
um sie zu halten, denn auf Versprechungen dienen sie nicht. 

 Aber ist dies auch ehrlich gehandelt?  bemerkte Georg,  heißt das
nicht, dem Feinde, der in ehrlicher Fehde mit uns lebt, die Waffen
stehlen und ihn dann überfallen? 

 In der Politika, wie wir es nennen,  gab der Ratsschreiber zur
Antwort und schien sich dem unerfahrenen Kriegsmann gegenüber kein
geringes Ansehen geben zu wollen;  in der Politika wird die Ehrlichkeit
höchstens zum Schein angewandt. So werden die Schweizer z. B. dem
Herzog erklären, daß sie sich ein Gewissen daraus machen, ihre Leute
gegen die freien Städte dienen zu lassen. Aber die Wahrheit ist, daß
wir dem großen Bären mehr Goldgülden in die Tatze drückten als der
Herzog. 

 Nun, und wenn die Schweizer auch abziehen,  sagte Georg,  so hat doch
Württemberg noch Leute genug, um keinen Hund über die Alb zu lassen. 

 Auch dafür wird gesorgt,  fuhr der Schreiber in seiner Erläuterung
fort,  wir schicken einen Brief an die Stände von Württemberg und
ermahnen sie, das unleidliche Regiment ihres Herzogs zu bedenken,
demselben keinen Beistand zu tun, sondern dem Bunde zuzuziehen. [15]

 Wie?  rief Georg mit Entsetzen,  das hieße ja den Herzog um sein Land
betrügen. Wollt ihr ihn denn zwingen, der Regierung zu entsagen und
sein schönes Württemberg mit dem Rücken anzusehen? 

 Und Ihr habt bisher geglaubt, man wolle nichts weiter, als etwa
Reutlingen wieder zur Reichsstadt machen? Von was soll denn Hutten
seine zweiundvierzig Gesellen und ihre Diener besolden? Wovon denn
Sickingen seine tausend Reiter und zwölftausend zu Fuß, wenn er nicht
ein hübsches Stückchen Land damit erkämpft? Und meint Ihr, der Herzog
von Bayern wolle nicht auch sein Teil? Und wir? Unsere Markung grenzt
zunächst an Württemberg -- 

 Aber die Fürsten Deutschlands,  unterbrach ihn Georg ungeduldig;
 meint Ihr, sie werden es ruhig mit ansehen, daß ihr ein schönes Land
in kleine Fetzen reißet? Der Kaiser, wird er es dulden, daß ihr einen
Herzog aus dem Lande jagt? 

Auch dafür wußte Herr Dietrich Rat.  Es ist kein Zweifel, daß Karl
seinem Vater als Kaiser folgt. Ihm selbst bieten wir das Land zur
Obervormundschaft an, und wenn Oesterreich seinen Mantel darauf deckt,
wer kann dagegen sein? Doch sehet nicht so düster aus. Wenn Euch nach
Krieg gelüstet, dazu kann Rat werden. Der Adel hält noch zum Herzog,
und an seinen Schlössern wird sich noch mancher die Zähne einbrechen.
Wir verschwatzen übrigens das Mittagsmahl. Kommt bald nach, daß
wir erfahren, was Frau Sabine uns gekocht hat.  Damit verließ der
Schreiber des großen Rates von Ulm so stolzen Schrittes, als wäre er
selbst schon Obervormund von Württemberg, das Zimmer seines Gastes.

Georg sandte ihm nicht die freundlichsten Blicke nach. Zürnend schob
er seinen Helm, den er noch vor einer Stunde mit so freudigem Mute
zu seinem ersten Kampf geschmückt hatte, in die Ecke. Mit Wehmut
betrachtete er sein altes Schwert, diesen treuen Stahl, den sein Vater
in manchem guten Streite geführt, den er sterbend seinem verwaisten
Knaben als einziges Erbe vom Schlachtfeld gesendet hatte.  Ficht
ehrlich!  war das Symbolum, das der Waffenschmied in die schöne Klinge
gegraben hatte, und er sollte sie für eine Sache führen, die ihre
Ungerechtigkeit an der Stirne trug? Wo er der Kriegskunst erfahrener
Männer, der Tapferkeit des einzelnen die Entscheidung zutraute, da
sollten geheime Ränke, die Politika, wie Herr Dietrich sich ausdrückte,
entscheiden? Wo ihn der fröhliche Glanz der Waffen, die Aussicht
auf Ruhm gelockt hatte, da sollte er nur den habgierigen Plänen
dieser Menschen dienen? Ein altes Fürstenhaus, dem seine Ahnen gerne
gedient hatten, sollte er von diesen Spießbürgern vertreiben sehen?
Unerträglich wollte ihm auch der Gedanke scheinen, von diesem Kraft
sich belehren lassen zu müssen.

Doch dem Unmut über seinen gutmütigen Wirt konnte er nicht lange Raum
geben, wenn er bedachte, daß ja jene Pläne nicht in seinem Kopfe
gewachsen seien, und daß Menschen, wie dieser politische Ratsschreiber,
wenn sie einmal ein Geheimnis, einen großen Gedanken in Erfahrung
gebracht haben; ihn hegen und pflegen wie ihren eigenen; daß sie sich
mit dem adoptierten Kinde brüsten, als wäre es Minerva, aus ihrem
eigenen harten Kopfe entsprungen.

Mit milderen Gedanken kam er zu seinem Gastfreund, als man ihn zu Tisch
rief.

Ja, die ganze Ansicht der Dinge wurde ihm nach einigen Stunden bei
weitem erträglicher, als er sich erinnerte, daß ja auch Mariens Vater
dieser Partei folge. Es war ihm, als möchte die Sache doch nicht so
schwarz sein, welcher Männer wie Frondsberg ihre Dienste geliehen.

    Schnell fertig ist die Jugend mit dem Wort,
    Das schwer sich handhabt wie des Messers Schneide;
    Gleich heißt ihr alles schändlich oder würdig,
    Bös oder gut.

Dieses wahre Wort des Dichters möge die Gesinnung Georgs bezeichnen,
die Gesinnung Georgs, der vielleicht allzuschnell seine Ansicht über
jene Dinge ändert. Und wie die düsteren Falten des Unmuts auf einer
jugendlichen Stirne sich schneller glätten, wie selbst schmerzliche
Eindrücke in des Jünglings Seele von freundlichen Bildern leicht
verdrängt werden, so erhellte auch Georgs Seele der freudige Gedanke an
den Abend.

Man hat uns erzählt, daß unter die schönsten Stunden im Leben der Liebe
die gehören, wo die Erwartung sich an schöne Erinnerungen knüpft. Der
Geist sei da ahnungsvoller, das Herz gehobener. So mochte auch Georg
fühlen. Er träumte von den schönen Augenblicken, wo es ihm vergönnt
sein werde, die Geliebte zu sehen, sie zu sprechen, ihre Hand zu fassen
und in ihrem Auge zu lesen.




6.

    Und als er sie schwingt nun im luftigen Reigen,
    Da flüstert sie leise, sie kann's nicht verschweigen.

            _Uhland._


Wenn es möglich gewesen wäre, auf einem Trödelmarkt oder in der Auktion
eines Antiquars ein  Taschenbuch zum geselligen Vergnügen, mit neuen
Tanztouren vom Jahr 1519  aufzufinden, wir hätten nicht leicht so
angenehm überrascht werden können, als durch einen Fund ähnlicher Art,
den uns der Zufall in die Hände spielte.

Wir waren nämlich in vorliegender Historie bis an dieses Kapitel
gekommen, das, um der Sage zu folgen, von einem Abendtanz handeln soll;
da fiel uns auf einmal der Gedanke schwer aufs Herz, daß wir ja nicht
einmal wissen, wie und was man in jenen Zeiten getanzt habe.

Wir hätten zwar schlechthin sagen können,  sie tanzten , aber wie
leicht wäre geschehen gewesen, daß eine unserer freundlichen Leserinnen
einen Anachronismus gemacht und etwa Georg von Frondsberg in ihren
Gedanken einen Kotillon hätte vortanzen lassen. In dieser Verlegenheit
stießen wir auf das sehr selten gewordene Buch:  Vom Anfang, Ursprung
und Herkommen der Turniere im heiligen römischen Reich. Frankfurth
1564.  Wir fanden in diesem teuern Folianten unter andern trefflichen
Holzschnitten einige, die einen solchen Abendtanz vorstellen, wie
er zuzeiten Kaiser Maximilians, etwa ein Jahr vor dieser Historie,
gehalten wurde.

Wir dürfen beinahe mit Gewißheit annehmen, daß der Abendtanz im Ulmer
Rathaussaal sich in nichts von jenem Angeführten unterschied, und man
wird sich den deutlichsten Begriff von einem solchen Vergnügen machen,
wenn wir eines dieser Bilder beschreiben.

Den Vordergrund nehmen Zuschauer und die Pfeifer, Trommler und
Trompeter ein, die, nach dem Ausdrucke des Turnierbuches,  eins
aufblasen . Zu beiden Seiten, mehr dem Hintergrunde zu, steht die
tanzlustige Jugend, in reiche, schwere Stoffe gekleidet. In unseren
Tagen sieht man bei solchen Gelegenheiten nur zwei Grundfarben,
schwarz und weiß, worein sich die Herren und Damen, wie in Nacht und
Tag geteilt haben; anders zu jenen Zeiten. Ein überraschender Glanz
der Farben strahlt uns aus jenem Bilde entgegen. Das herrlichste Rot,
vom brennendsten Scharlach bis zum dunkelsten Purpur, jenes brennende
Blau, das uns noch heute an den Gemälden alter Meister überrascht,
sind die freudigen Farben ihrer malerisch drapierten Gewänder. Die
Mitte der Szene nimmt der eigentliche Tanz ein. Er hat am meisten
Aehnlichkeit mit der Polonaise, denn er ist ein Umzug im Saale. Den Zug
eröffnen vier Trompeter mit langen Wappenfahnen an den Instrumenten;
diesen folgt der Vortänzer und seine Dame; diese Stelle bekleidet bei
jedem Tanze wieder ein anderer, und es entschied hiebei nicht die
Geschicklichkeit, sondern der Rang des Tänzers. Auf diese folgen zwei
Fackelträger und dann Paar um Paar der lange Zug der Tanzenden. Die
Damen schreiten ehrbar und züchtig einher, die Männer aber setzen ihre
Füße wunderlich, wie zu kühnen Sprüngen, einige scheinen auch mit den
Absätzen den Takt zu stampfen, wie wir auf jeder Kirchweihe in Schwaben
noch heutzutage sehen können.

So war der Abendtanz zu Ulm. Man blies schon längst zum ersten auf,
als Georg von Sturmfeder in den Rathaussaal eintrat. Seine Blicke
schweiften durch die Reihen der Tanzenden, und endlich trafen sie
Marien. Sie tanzte mit einem jungen, fränkischen Ritter seiner
Bekanntschaft, schien aber der eifrigen Rede, die er an sie richtete,
nicht Gehör zu geben. Ihr Auge suchte den Boden, ihre Miene konnte
Ernst, beinahe Trauer ausdrücken; ganz anders als die übrigen Fräulein,
die, in der wahren Tanzseligkeit schwimmend, ein Ohr der Musik,
das andere dem Tänzer liehen, und die freundlichen Augen bald ihren
Bekannten, um den Beifall in ihren Mienen zu lesen, bald ihren Tänzern
zuwandten, um zu prüfen, ob ihre Aufmerksamkeit auch ganz gewiß auf sie
gerichtet sei.

In gehaltenen Tönen hielten jetzt die Zinken und Trompeten aus und
endeten; Herr Dietrich Kraft hatte seinen Gastfreund bemerkt und kam,
ihn, wie er versprochen, zu seinen Muhmen zu führen. Er flüsterte
ihm zu, daß er selbst schon für den nächsten Tanz mit Bäschen Bertha
versagt sei, doch habe er soeben um Mariens Hand für seinen Gast
geworben.

Beide Mädchen waren auf die Erscheinung des ihnen so interessanten
Fremden vorbereitet gewesen, und dennoch bedeckte die Erinnerung
dessen, was sie über ihn gesprochen, Berthas angenehme Züge mit hoher
Glut, und die Verwirrung, in welche sie sein Anblick versetzte,
ließ sie nicht bemerken, welches Entzücken ihm aus Mariens Auge
entgegenstrahlte, wie sie bebte, wie sie mühsam nach Atem suchte, wie
ihr selbst die Sprache ihre Dienste zu versagen schien.

 Da bringe ich euch Herrn Georg von Sturmfeder, meinen lieben Gast, 
begann der Ratsschreiber,  der um die Gunst bittet, mit euch zu tanzen. 

 Wenn ich nicht schon diesen Tanz an meinen Vetter zugesagt hätte, 
antwortete Bertha, schneller gefaßt als ihre Base,  so solltet Ihr ihn
haben, aber Marie ist noch frei, die wird mit Euch tanzen. 

 So seid Ihr noch nicht versagt, Fräulein von Lichtenstein?  fragte
Georg, indem er sich zu der Geliebten wandte.

 Ich bin an Euch versagt,  antwortete Marie. So hörte er denn zum
erstenmal wieder diese Stimme, die ihn so oft mit den süßesten Namen
genannt hatte; er sah in diese treuen Augen, die ihn noch immer so hold
anblickten wie vormals.

Die Trompeten schmetterten in den Saal; der Oberfeldleutnant Waldburg
Truchseß, dem man den zweiten Tanz gegeben hatte, schritt mit seiner
Tänzerin vor, die Fackelträger folgten, die Paare ordneten sich, und
auch Georg ergriff Mariens Hand und schloß sich an. Jetzt suchten
ihre Blicke nicht mehr den Boden, sie hingen an denen des Geliebten;
und dennoch wollte es ihm scheinen, als mache sie dieses Wiedersehen
nicht so glücklich wie ihn, denn noch immer lag eine düstere Wolke von
Schwermut oder Trauer um ihre Stirne. Sie sah sich um, ob Dietrich und
Bertha, das nächste Paar nach ihnen, nicht allzunahe seien. -- Sie
waren ferne.

 Ach Georg,  begann sie,  welch unglücklicher Stern hat dich in dieses
Heer geführt? 

 Du warst dieser Stern, Marie,  sagte er;  dich habe ich auf dieser
Seite geahnet, und wie glücklich bin ich, daß ich dich fand! Kannst
du mich tadeln, daß ich die gelehrten Bücher beiseite legte und
Kriegsdienste nahm? Ich habe ja kein Erbe als das Schwert meines
Vaters; aber mit diesem Gut will ich wuchern, daß der deinige sehen
soll, daß seine Tochter keinen Unwürdigen liebt. 

 Ach Gott! Du hast doch dem Bunde noch nicht zugesagt?  unterbrach sie
ihn.

 Aengstige dich doch nicht so, mein Liebchen, ich habe noch nicht
völlig zugesagt; aber es muß nächster Tage geschehen. Willst du denn
deinem Georg nicht auch ein wenig Kriegsruhm gönnen? Warum magst du um
mich so bange haben? Dein Vater ist alt und zieht ja doch auch mit aus. 

 Ach, mein Vater, mein Vater!  klagte Marie,  er ist ja -- doch brich
ab, Georg, brich ab -- Bertha belauscht uns; aber ich muß dich morgen
sprechen, ich muß, und sollte es meine Seligkeit kosten. Ach! wenn ich
nur wüßte, wie? 

 Was ängstigt dich denn nur so?  fragte Georg, dem es unbegreiflich
war, wie Marie, statt sich der Freude des Wiedersehens hinzugeben,
nur an die Gefahren dachte, denen er entgegengehe?  Du stellst dir
die Gefahren größer vor, als sie sind,  flüsterte er ihr tröstend zu.
 Denke an nichts, als daß wir uns jetzt wiederhaben, daß ich deine
Hand drücken darf, daß Auge in Auge sieht wie sonst. Genieße jetzt die
Augenblicke, sei heiter! 

 Heiter? O diese Zeiten sind vorbei, Georg! Höre und sei standhaft --
mein Vater ist nicht bündisch! 

 Jesus Maria! was sagst du?  rief der Jüngling und beugte sich, als
habe er das Wort des Unglücks nicht gehört, herab zu Marien;  o sage,
ist denn dein Vater nicht hier in Ulm? 

Sie hatte sich stärker geglaubt; sie konnte nicht mehr sprechen;
bei dem ersten Laut wären ihre Tränen unaufhaltsam geflossen; sie
antwortete nur durch einen Druck der Hand und ging, mit gesenktem
Haupt nach Kraft suchend, ihren Schmerz zu bekämpfen, neben Georg her.
Endlich siegte der starke Geist dieses Mädchens über die Schwäche ihrer
Natur, die einem so tiefen Kummer beinahe erlegen wäre.  Mein Vater, 
flüsterte sie,  ist Herzog Ulrichs wärmster Freund, und sobald der
Krieg entschieden ist, führt er mich heim auf den Lichtenstein! 

Betäubend wirbelten jetzt die Trommeln, in volleren Tönen schmetterten
die Trompeten, sie begrüßten den Truchseß, der eben an dem Musikchor
vorüberzog; er warf ihnen, wie es Sitte war, einige Silberstücke zu,
und von neuem erhob sich ihr betäubender Jubel.

Das leise Gespräch der Liebenden verstummte vor der rauhen Gewalt
dieser Töne, aber ihr Auge hatte sich in diesem Schiffbruch ihrer Liebe
um so mehr zu sagen, und sie bemerkten nicht einmal, wie ein Geflüster
über sie im Saal erging, das sie als das schönste Paar pries.

Aber nur zu wohl hatte Bertha diese Bemerkungen der Menge gehört.
Sie war zu gutmütig, als daß Neid darüber in ihre Seele gekommen
wäre, aber sie setzte sich doch im Geiste an Mariens Platz und fand,
daß man vielleicht das Paar nicht minder schön gefunden hätte. Auch
das Gespräch, das zwischen den beiden begonnen hatte, fiel ihr auf.
Die ernste Base, die selten oder nie mit einem Manne lange sprach,
schien mehr und angelegentlicher zu reden als ihr Tänzer. Die Musik
hinderte sie zu verstehen, was gesprochen wurde; die Neugierde, die man
vielleicht nicht mit Unrecht jungen Mädchen ausschließlich zuschreibt,
wurde in ihr rege, sie zog ihren Tänzer näher an das vordere Paar, um
-- ein wenig zu lauschen; aber war es Zufall oder Absicht, das Gespräch
verstummte, als sie näher kam oder wurde so leise geführt, daß sie
nichts davon verstand.

Ihr Interesse an dem schönen jungen Mann wuchs mit diesen Hindernissen;
noch nie war ihr der gute Vetter Kraft so lästig geworden als in diesen
Augenblicken; denn die zierlichen Redensarten, womit er ihr Herz zu
umspinnen gedachte, verhinderten sie, jene genauer zu beobachten. Sie
war froh, als endlich der Tanz sich endigte. Denn sie durfte hoffen,
daß der nächste an des jungen Ritters Seite desto angenehmer für sie
sein werde.

Sie täuschte sich nicht in ihrer Hoffnung; Georg kam, sie um den
nächsten Tanz zu bitten, der auch sogleich begann, und sie hüpfte
fröhlich an seiner Seite in die Reihen. Aber es war nicht mehr
derselbe, der vorhin mit Marien so freundlich gesprochen hatte.
Verstört, einsilbig, in tiefe Gedanken versunken, war der junge Mann an
ihrer Seite, und es war nur zu sichtbar, daß er sich immer wieder erst
sammeln mußte, wenn er eine ihrer Fragen beantworten sollte.

War dies jener  höfliche Ritter,  welcher sie, ohne daß sie sich
je gesehen hatten, so freundlich grüßte? War es derselbe, welcher
so heiter, so fröhlich war, als ihn Vetter Kraft zu ihnen führte?
Derselbe, der mit Marien so eifrig sich unterredet hatte? Oder sollte
diese --? Ja, es war klar. Marie hatte ihm besser gefallen, ach!
vielleicht weil sie die erste war, die mit ihm tanzte. Je weniger
Bertha gewohnt war, sich der ernsten Marie nachgesetzt zu sehen, um
so mehr befremdete sie dieser Sieg ihrer Base, um so mehr glaubte sie
sich beeifern zu müssen, ihren Rang, ihre Gaben geltend zu machen. Sie
setzte daher mit ihrer heiteren Geschwätzigkeit das Gespräch über den
bevorstehenden Krieg, das sie mit Mühe angesponnen hatte, fort, als
sie nach Beendigung des Tanzes zu Marien und dem Ratsschreiber traten.
 Nun, und der wievielte Feldzug ist es denn, Herr von Sturmfeder, dem
Ihr jetzt beiwohnt? 

 Es ist mein erster,  antwortete dieser kurz abgebrochen, denn er war
unmutig darüber, daß jene ihn noch immer im Gespräch halte, da er mit
Marie so gern gesprochen hätte.

 Euer erster?  entgegnete Bertha verwundert.  Ihr wollt mir etwas
weismachen, da habt Ihr ja schon eine mächtige Narbe auf der Stirne. 

 Die bekam ich auf der hohen Schule,  antwortete Georg.

 Wie? Ihr seid ein Gelehrter?  fragte jene eifrig weiter.  Nun, und da
seid Ihr gewiß recht weit gewesen; etwa in Padua oder Bologna oder gar
bei den Ketzern in Wittenberg. 

 Nicht so weit, als Ihr meint,  entgegnete er, indem er sich zu Marien
wandte;  ich war in Tübingen. 

 In Tübingen!  rief Bertha voll Verwunderung. Wie ein Blitz erhellte
dies einzige Wort alles, was ihr bisher dunkel war, und ein Blick auf
Marien, die mit niedergeschlagenen Augen, mit der Röte der Scham auf
den Wangen vor ihr stand, überzeugte sie, daß die lange Reihe von
Schlüssen, die sich an jenes Wort anschlossen, ihren nur zu sicheren
Grund haben. Jetzt war ihr auf einmal klar, warum sie der artige Ritter
begrüßt, warum Marie weinte, die ihn gewiß gerne auf der feindlichen
Seite gesehen hätte, warum er so viel mit jener gesprochen, warum er
bei ihr selbst so einsilbig war. Es war keine Frage, sie kannten sich,
sie mußten sich längst gekannt haben.

Beschämung war das erste Gefühl, das bei dieser Entdeckung Berthas
Herz bestürmte; sie errötete vor sich selbst, wenn sie sich gestand,
nach der Aufmerksamkeit eines Mannes gestrebt zu haben, dessen
Seele ein ganz anderer Gegenstand beschäftigte. Unmut über Mariens
Heimlichkeit verfinsterte ihre Züge. Sie suchte Entschuldigung für ihr
eigenes Betragen und fand sie nur in der Falschheit ihrer Base. Hätte
diese ihr gestanden, in welchem Verhältnis sie zu dem jungen Manne
stehe, sie hätte ihr nie ihre Teilnahme an ihm gezeigt; er wäre ihr
dann, meinte sie, höchst gleichgültig geblieben, sie hätte nie diese
Beschämung erfahren. Wir haben es von guter Hand, daß junge Damen große
Beleidigungen, tiefere Schmerzen im Gefühl ihrer Würde mit Anstand
zu ertragen wissen; daß sie aber oft, wenn es sich um geringe Dinge
handelt, nicht Gleichmut genug besitzen, um das Wahre vom Falschen zu
unterscheiden, nicht Großmut genug, um zu vergessen.

Bertha hatte an diesem Abend den unglücklichen jungen Mann keines
Blickes mehr gewürdigt, was ihm übrigens über dem größeren Schmerz, der
seine Seele beschäftigte, völlig entging. Sein Unglück wollte es auch,
daß er nie mehr Gelegenheit fand, Marien wieder allein und ungestört
zu sprechen; der Abendtanz ging zu Ende, ohne daß er über Mariens
Schicksal und über die Gesinnungen ihres Vaters gewisser wurde, und
Marie fand kaum noch auf der Treppe Gelegenheit, ihm zuzuflüstern, er
möchte morgen in der Stadt bleiben, weil sie vielleicht irgend eine
Gelegenheit finden würde, ihn zu sprechen.

Verstimmt kamen die beiden Schönen nach Hause. Bertha hatte auf alle
Fragen Mariens kurze Antwort gegeben, und auch diese, sei es, daß
sie ahnete, was in ihrer Freundin vorgehe, sei es, weil sie selbst
ein großer Schmerz beschäftigte, war nach und nach immer düsterer,
einsilbiger geworden.

Aber auf beiden lastete die Störung ihres bisherigen freundschaftlichen
Verhältnisses erst recht schwer, als sie ernst und schweigend in
ihr Gemach traten. Sie hatten sich bisher alle jene kleinen Dienste
geleistet, welche junge Mädchen nur zu noch engerer Freundschaft
verbinden. Wie ganz anders war es heute! Bertha hatte die silberne
Nadel aus dem reichen blonden Haar gezogen, daß es in langen
Ringellocken über den schönen Nacken herabströmte. Sie versuchte,
es unter das Nachthäubchen zu stecken; ungewohnt, diese Arbeit ohne
Mariens Hilfe zu verrichten, kam sie nicht damit zustande, aber zu
stolz, ihre Feindin, wie sie Marien in ihrem Sinne nannte, ihre
Verlegenheit merken zu lassen, warf sie das Häubchen in die Ecke und
ergriff ein Tuch, um es um das Haar zu winden.

Schweigend nahm Marie das verworfene Häubchen wieder auf und trat
hinzu, das Haar ihrer Base nach gewohnter Weise zu ordnen und
aufzubinden.

 Hinweg, du Falsche!  rief die erzürnte Bertha, indem sie die
hilfreiche Hand zurückstieß.

 Bertha, hab' ich dies um dich verdient?  sprach Marie mit Ruhe und
Sanftmut.  O, wenn du wüßtest, wie unglücklich ich bin, du würdest
sanfter gegen mich sein! 

 Unglücklich?  lachte jene laut auf,  unglücklich! vielleicht weil der
artige Herr nur einmal mit dir tanzte? 

 Du bist recht hart, Bertha;  antwortete Marie,  du bist böse auf mich
und sagst mir nicht einmal, warum. 

 So? Du willst also nicht wissen, daß du mich betrogen hast? Nicht
wissen, wie mich deine Heimlichkeiten dem Spott und der Beschämung
aussetzen? Ich hätte nie geglaubt, daß du so schlecht, so falsch an mir
handeln würdest! 

Von neuem erwachte in Bertha das kränkende Gefühl, sich hintangesetzt
zu sehen; ihre Tränen strömten, sie legte die heiße Stirne in die Hand,
und die reichen Locken flossen über ihr zusammen und verhüllten die
Weinende.

Tränen sind die Zeichen milderen Schmerzes. Marie kannte diese
Tränen und fuhr mit mehr Vertrauen fort:  Bertha! Du schiltst meine
Heimlichkeit. Ich sehe, du hast erraten, was ich nie von selbst
sagen konnte. Setze dich selbst in meine Lage. Ach, du selbst, so
heiter und offen du bist, du selbst hättest mir dein Geheimnis nicht
vertrauen können. Aber jetzt ist es ja aus. Du weißt, was meine Lippen
auszusprechen sich scheuten. Ich liebe ihn, ja ich werde geliebt, und
nicht erst von gestern her. Willst du mich hören? Darf ich dir alles
sagen? 

Berthas Tränen flossen noch immer. Sie antwortete nicht auf jene
Fragen, aber Marie hub an zu erzählen, wie sie Georg im Hause der
seligen Muhme kennen gelernt habe; wie sie ihm gut gewesen, lange ehe
er ihr seine Liebe gestanden. Alle jene schönen Erinnerungen lebten
in ihr auf, mit glühenden Wangen, mit strahlendem Auge führte sie die
Vergangenheit herauf. Sie erzählte von so mancher schönen Stunde, vom
Schwur ihrer Treue, von ihrem Abschied.  Und jetzt,  fuhr sie mit
wehmütigem Lächeln fort,  jetzt hat ihn dieser unglückliche Krieg auf
diese Seite geführt. Er hört, wir seien hier in Ulm, er glaubt nicht
anders, als mein Vater sei dem Bunde beigetreten, er hofft, mich durch
sein Schwert zu verdienen, denn er ist arm, recht arm! O Bertha, du
kennst meinen Vater. Er ist so gut, aber auch so strenge, wenn etwas
seiner Meinung widerspricht. Wird er einem Manne seine Tochter geben,
der sein Schwert gegen Württemberg gezogen hat? Siehe, das waren meine
Tränen! Ach, ich wollte dir so oft sagen, warum sie fließen, aber eine
unbesiegbare Scham schloß meine Lippen. Kannst du mir noch zürnen? Muß
ich mit dem Geliebten auch die Freundin verlieren? 

Auch Mariens Tränen flossen, und Bertha fühlte den eigenen Schmerz von
dem größeren Kummer der Freundin besiegt. Sie umarmte Marien schweigend
und weinte mit ihr.

 In den nächsten Tagen,  fuhr diese fort,  will mein Vater Ulm
verlassen, und ich muß ihm folgen. Aber noch einmal muß ich Georg
sprechen, nur ein Viertelstündchen. Bertha, du kannst gewiß Gelegenheit
geben. Nur ein ganz kleines Viertelstündchen! 

 Du willst ihn doch nicht der guten Sache abwendig machen?  fragte
Bertha.

 Was nennst du die gute Sache?  antwortete Marie.  Des Herzogs Sache
ist vielleicht nicht minder gut als die eure. Du sprichst so, weil ihr
bündisch seid. Ich bin eine Württembergerin, und mein Vater ist seinem
Herzoge treu. Doch sollen wir Mädchen über den Krieg entscheiden? Laß
uns lieber auf Mittel sinnen, ihn noch einmal zu sehen. 

Bertha hatte über der Teilnahme, mit welcher sie der Geschichte ihrer
Base zugehört hatte, ganz vergessen, daß sie ihr jemals gram gewesen
war. Sie war überdies für alles Geheimnisvolle eingenommen, daher kamen
ihr diese Mitteilungen erwünscht. Sie fühlte, wie wichtig und ehrenvoll
der Posten einer Vertrauten sei, und gab sich daher alle mögliche Mühe,
dem liebenden Paar mit ihrem Scharfsinn zu dienen.

 Ich hab's gefunden,  rief sie endlich aus,  wir laden ihn geradezu in
den Garten. 

 In den Garten?  fragte Marie schüchtern und ungläubig,  und durch wen? 

 Sein Wirt, der gute Vetter Dietrich, muß ihn selbst bringen; 
antwortete sie,  das ist herrlich, und dieser darf auch kein Wörtchen
davon merken, laß mich nur dafür sorgen. 

Marie, entschlossen und stark bei großen Dingen, zitterte doch bei
diesem gewagten Schritte. Aber ihre mutige, fröhliche Base wußte ihr
alle Bedenklichkeiten auszureden, und mit zurückgekehrter Hoffnung und
befreit von der Last des Geheimnisses, umarmten sich die Mädchen, ehe
sie sich zur Ruhe legten.




7.

    Und wie ein Geist schlingt um den Hals
    Das Liebchen sich herum:
     Willst mich verlassen, liebes Herz,
    Auf ewig?  und der bittre Schmerz
    Macht's arme Liebchen stumm.

            _Schubart._


Sinnend und traurig saß Georg am Mittag nach dem festlichen Abend in
seinem Gemach. Er hatte Breitenstein besucht und wenig Tröstliches für
seine Hoffnungen erfahren. Der Kriegsrat hatte sich an diesem Morgen
versammelt, und unwiderruflich war der Krieg beschlossen worden.
Zwölf Edelknaben waren, die Absagebriefe des Herzogs von Bayern,
der Ritterschaft und gesamter Städte an ihre Lanzen geheftet, zum
Gögglinger Tor hinausgejagt, um die Feindesbotschaft dem Württemberger
nach Blaubeuren zu bringen. Auf den Straßen rief man einander fröhlich
diese Nachricht zu, und die Freude, daß es jetzt endlich ins Feld gehen
werde, stand deutlich auf allen Gesichtern geschrieben. Nur _einen_
traf diese Kunde wie das schreckliche Machtwort seines Schicksals. Der
Gram trieb ihn aus dem Kreise der fröhlichen Gesellen, die jetzt den
Weinstuben zuzogen, um in lautem Jubel das Geburtsfest des Krieges
zu begehen und das Los künftiger Siege im Würfelspiel zu belauschen.
Ach! ihm waren ja schon die Würfel gefallen! Ein blutiges Schlachtfeld
dehnte sich zwischen ihm und seiner Liebe aus, sie war ihm auf lange,
vielleicht auf ewig verloren.

Eilige Tritte, welche die Treppe heraufstürmten, weckten ihn aus seinem
Brüten. Der Ratsschreiber steckte den Kopf in die Türe.  Glück auf,
Junker!  rief er,  jetzt hebt der Tanz erst recht an. Aber Ihr wißt es
vielleicht noch gar nicht? Der Krieg ist angekündigt, schon vor einer
Stunde sind unsere Absageboten ausgeritten. 

 Ich weiß es,  antwortete sein finsterer Gast.

 Nun, und hüpft Euch das Herz nicht freier? Habt Ihr auch gehört
-- nein, das könnt Ihr nicht wissen,  fuhr Dietrich fort, indem er
zutraulich näher zu ihm trat,  daß die Schweizer bereits abziehen? 

 Wie, sie ziehen?  unterbrach ihn Georg.  Also hat der Krieg schon ein
Ende? 

 Das möchte ich nicht gerade behaupten,  fuhr der Ratsschreiber
bedenklich fort,  der Herzog von Württemberg ist noch ein junger,
mutiger Herr und hat noch Ritter und Dienstleute genug. Zwar wird er
wohl keine offene Feldschlacht mehr wagen, aber er hat feste Städte
und Burgen. Da ist einmal der Höllenstein, und darin Stephan von
Lichow, ein Mann wie Eisen; da ist Göppingen, das Philipp von Rechberg
auch nicht auf den ersten Stückschuß ergeben wird; da ist Schorndorf,
Rothenburg und Asperg, da ist vor allem Tübingen, das er tüchtig
befestigt hat. Es wird noch mancher ins Gras beißen, bis ihr eure Rosse
im Neckar tränket.

Nun, nun!  fuhr er fort, als er sah, daß seine Nachrichten die finstere
Stirne seines schweigenden Gastes nicht aufheitern konnten,  wenn Ihr
diese kriegerischen Botschaften nicht freundlich aufnehmet, so schenkt
Ihr vielleicht einem friedlicheren Auftrag ein geneigtes Ohr. Sagt
einmal, habt Ihr nicht irgendwo eine Base? 

 Base? Ja, warum fragt Ihr? 

 Nun sehet, jetzt erst verstehe ich die verwirrten Reden, die vorhin
Bertha vorbrachte. Als ich aus dem Rathause kam, winkte sie mir hinauf
und befahl mir, meinen Gast heute nachmittag in ihren Garten an der
Donau zu führen, Marie habe Euch etwas sehr Wichtiges an Eure Base, die
sie sehr gut kenne, aufzutragen. Ihr müßt mir schon den Gefallen tun,
mitzugehen. Solche Geheimnisse und Aufträge sind zwar gewöhnlich nicht
weit her, und ich wollte wetten, sie geben Euch ein Müsterlein für den
Webstuhl oder eine Probe feiner Wolle oder ein tiefes Geheimnis der
Kochkunst oder gar ein paar Körnlein von einer seltenen Blume mit, denn
Marie ist eine große Gärtnerin -- doch, wenn Ihr gestern an dem Mädchen
Gefallen gefunden habt, gehet Ihr wohl selbst gerne mit. 

Mitten in den schmerzlichen Gedanken an die Scheidestunde mußte Georg
über die List der Mädchen lachen. Freundlich bot er dem guten Boten die
Hand und schickte sich an, ihn in den Garten zu begleiten.

Dieser lag an der Donau, ungefähr zweitausend Schritte unter der
Brücke. Er war nicht groß, zeugte aber von Sorgfalt und Fleiß.
Die schönen Obstbäume waren zwar noch nicht belaubt, und die in
wunderlichen Formen abgestochenen Beete hatten noch keine Blumen, aber
ein langer Taxusgang, der an dem Ufer des Flusses sich hinzog und
in einer geräumigen Laube endete, gab durch sein helles Grün einen
lebhaften Anblick und hinlänglichen Schutz gegen die einem weißen Hals
und schönen Armen so gefährlichen Strahlen der Märzsonne. Dort, auf
dem breiten, bequemen Steinsitze, wo die Lücken der Laube eine freie
Aussicht die Donau hinauf und hinab gewährten, hatten die Mädchen unter
mancherlei Gesprächen der jungen Männer geharrt.

Marie saß traurig in sich gekehrt. Sie hatte den schönen Arm auf eine
Lücke der Laube aufgestützt und das von Gram und Tränen müde Köpfchen
in die Hand gelegt. Ihr dunkles, glänzendes Haar hob die Weiße ihres
Teints um so mehr heraus, als stiller Kummer ihre Wangen gebleicht
und schlaflose Nächte dem lieblichen blauen Auge seinen sonst so
überraschenden Glanz geraubt und ihm einen matteren, vielleicht nur
um so anziehenderen Schimmer von Melancholie gegeben hatten. Das
vollendete Bild fröhlichen Lebens, saß die frische, runde, rosige
Bertha neben ihr. Wie ihre gelblichen Locken mit Mariens dunklen
Haaren, ihr rundes, frisches Gesichtchen mit den ovalen, schärferen
Formen ihrer Base, wie ihre freundlichen, beweglichen hellbraunen Augen
in auffallendem Kontrast standen mit dem sinnenden, geistvollen Blick
Mariens: so wurde auch jede ihrer raschen, lebhaften Bewegungen zum
Gegensatz gegen jene stille Trauer.

Bertha schien ihre rosigste Laune hervorgeholt zu haben, um ihre Base
zu trösten oder doch ihren großen Schmerz zu zerstreuen. Sie erzählte
und schwatzte, sie lachte und ahmte die Gebärde und Sprache vieler
Leute nach, sie versuchte alle jene tausend kleinen Künste, womit die
Natur ihre fröhliche Tochter ausstattete. Aber wir glauben, daß sie
wenig ausrichtete, denn nur hie und da gleitete ein wehmütiges, schnell
verschwebendes Lächeln über Mariens feine Züge hin.

Endlich ergriff sie, als gar nichts mehr helfen wollte, ihre Laute, die
in der Ecke stand. Marie besaß auf diesem Instrument große Fertigkeit,
und Bertha hätte sich sonst nicht so leicht bewegen lassen, vor der
Meisterin zu spielen. Doch heute hoffte sie durch ihr Geklimper
wenigstens ihrer Base ein Lächeln zu entlocken. Sie setzte sich mit
großem Ernste nieder und begann:

     Fragt mich jemand, was ist Minne?
    Wüßt' ich gern auch darum meh(r).
    Wer nun recht darüber sinne,
    Sag' mir, warum tut sie weh?
    Minne ist Liebe, tut sie wohl;
    Tut sie weh, heißt sie nicht Minne,
    O, dann weiß ich, wie sie heißen soll. 

 Wo hast du dies alte schwäbische Liedchen her?  fragte Marie, die der
einfachen Musik und dem lieblichen Text gern ihr Ohr lieh.

 Nicht wahr, es ist hübsch? Aber es kommt noch viel hübscher, wenn
du hören willst,  antwortete Bertha.  Das hat mich in Nürnberg ein
Meistersänger, Hans Sachs, gelehrt; es ist übrigens nicht von ihm,
sondern von Walther von der Vogelweide, der wohl vor dreihundert Jahren
gelebt und geliebt hat. Höre nur weiter:

    Ob ich recht erraten könne,
    Was die Minne sei? So sprecht ja.
    Minne ist zweier Herzen Wonne;
    Teilen sie gleich, so ist sie da.
    Doch -- soll ungeteilt sein,
    So kann ein Herz allein sie nicht enthalten.
    Willst du mir helfen, traute Jungfrau mein? 

 Nun, hast du geteilt mit dem armen Junker?  fragte die schelmische
Bertha ihre errötende Base.  Vetter Kraft möchte gerne auch mit mir
teilen, einstweilen kann er aber seinen ganzen Part allein tragen.
Doch du wirst wieder ernst, ich muß noch ein Liedchen des alten Herrn
Walther singen:

    Ich weiß nicht, wie es damit geschah,
    Meinem Auge ist's noch nie geschehen,
    Seit ich sie in meinem Herzen sah,
    Kann ich sie auch ohne Augen sehen.
    Da ist doch ein Wunder mit geschehen,
    Denn wer gab es, daß es ohne Augen
    Sie zu aller Zeit mag sehen?

    Wollt ihr wissen, was die Augen sein,
    Womit ich sie sehe durch alle Land'?
    Es sind die Gedanken des Herzens mein,
    Damit schau' ich durch Mauer und Wand,
    Und hüten diese sie noch so gut,
    Es schauen sie mit vollen Augen
    Das Herz, der Wille und mein Mut. 

Marie lobte das Lied des Herrn Walther von der Vogelweide als einen
guten Trost beim Scheiden. Bertha bestätigte es.  Ich weiß noch einen
Reim,  sagte sie lächelnd und sang:

     Und zog sie auch weit in das Schwabenland,
    Seine Augen schauen durch Mauer und Wand,
    Seine Blicke bohren durch Fels und Stein!
    Er schaut durch die Alb nach dem Lichtenstein! 

Als Bertha noch im Nachspiel zu ihrem Liedchen begriffen war, ging die
Gartenpforte. Männertritte tönten den Gang herauf, und die Mädchen
standen auf, die Erwarteten zu empfangen.

 Herr von Sturmfeder,  begann Bertha nach den ersten Begrüßungen,
 verzeihet doch, daß ich es wagte, Euch in meines Vaters Garten
einzuladen. Aber meine Base Marie wünscht Euch Aufträge an eine
Freundin zu geben. -- Nun, und daß wir andern nicht zu kurz kommen, 
setzte sie, zu Herrn Kraft gewandt, hinzu,  so wollen wir eins plaudern
und den Abendtanz von gestern mustern.  Damit ergriff sie ihres Vetters
Hand und zog ihn mit sich den Gang hinab.

Georg hatte sich zu Marie auf die Bank gesetzt. Sie lehnte sich
an seine Brust und weinte heftig. Die süßesten Worte, die er ihr
zuflüsterte, vermochten nicht, ihre Tränen zu stillen.  Marie,  sagte
er,  du warst ja sonst so stark, wie kannst du nun gerade jetzt allen
Glauben an ein besseres Geschick, alle Hoffnung aufgeben? 

 Hoffnung?  fragte sie wehmütig,  mit unserer Hoffnung, mit unserem
Glück ist es für ewig aus. 

 Sieh,  antwortete Georg,  eben dies kann ich nicht glauben, ich trage
die Gewißheit unserer Liebe in mir so innig, so tief, und ich sollte
jemals glauben, daß sie untergehen könnte? 

 Du hoffst noch? So höre mich ganz an. Ich muß dir ein tiefes Geheimnis
sagen, an dem das Leben meines Vaters hängt. Mein Vater ist so sehr
ein bitterer Feind des Bundes, als er ein Freund des Herzogs ist.
Er ist nicht nur deswegen hier, um sein Kind heimzuholen, nein, er
sucht die Pläne des Bundes zu erforschen und mit Geld und Rede zu
verwirren. Und glaubst du, ein so bitterer Gegner des Bundes werde
seine einzige Tochter einem Jüngling geben, der durch unser Verderben
sich emporzuschwingen sucht, einem, der sich an Menschen anschließt,
die kein Recht, sondern nur Raub suchen? 

 Dein Eifer führt dich zu weit, Marie,  unterbrach sie der Jüngling.
 Du mußt wissen, daß mancher Ehrenmann in diesem Heere dient! 

 Und wenn dies wäre,  fuhr jene eifrig fort,  so sind sie betrogen und
verführt, wie auch du betrogen bist. 

 Wer sagt dir dies so gewiß?  entgegnete Georg, welcher errötete, die
Partei, die er ergriffen, von einem Mädchen so erniedrigt zu sehen,
obgleich er ahnete, daß sie so unrecht nicht habe.  Wer sagt dir
dies so gewiß? Kann nicht dein Vater auch verblendet und betrogen
sein? Wie mag er nur mit so vielem Eifer die Sache dieses stolzen,
herrschsüchtigen Mannes führen, der seine Edlen ermordet, der seine
Bürger in den Staub tritt, der an seiner Tafel das Mark des Landes
verpraßt und seine Bauern verschmachten läßt? 

 Ja, so schildern ihn seine Feinde,  antwortete Marie,  so spricht
man von ihm in diesem Heere; aber frage dort unten an den Ufern des
Neckars, ob sie ihren angestammten Fürsten nicht lieben, wenngleich
seine Hand zuweilen schwer auf ihnen ruht. Frage jene Männer, die
mit ihm ausgezogen sind, ob sie nicht freudig ihr Blut für den Enkel
Eberhards geben, ehe sie diesem stolzen Herzog von Bayern, diesen
räuberischen Edlen, diesen Städtlern ihr Land abtreten. [18]

Georg schwieg eine Zeitlang nachdenklich.  Aber wie entschuldigen denn
diese warmen Verteidiger den Mord des Hutten?  fragte er.

 Ihr sprecht immer von Eurer Ehre,  antwortete Marie,  und wollt
nicht leiden, daß ein Herzog seine Ehre verteidige? Hutten ist
nicht meuchelmörderisch gefallen, wie seine Anhänger in alle Welt
ausgeschrieen haben, sondern im ehrlichen Kampfe, worin der Herzog
selbst sein Leben einsetzte. Ich will nicht alles verteidigen, was er
tat; aber man soll nur auch bedenken, daß ein junger Herr, wie der
Herzog, von schlechten Räten umgeben, nicht immer weise handeln kann.
Aber er ist gewiß gut, und wenn du wüßtest, wie mild, wie leutselig er
sein kann! 

 Es fehlt nur noch, daß du ihn auch den schönen Herzog nennst,  sagte
Georg, bitter lächelnd.  Du wirst reichen Ersatz finden für den armen
Georg, wenn er es der Mühe wert hält, mein Bild aus deinem Herzen zu
verdrängen. 

 Wahrlich, dieser kleinlichen Eifersucht habe ich dich nicht fähig
gehalten,  antwortete Marie, indem sie sich mit Tränen des Unmuts,
im Gefühl gekränkter Würde, abwandte.  Glaubst du denn, das Herz
eines Mädchens könne nicht auch warm für die Sache ihres Vaterlandes
schlagen? 

 Sei mir nicht böse,  bat Georg, der mit Reue und Beschämung einsah,
wie ungerecht er sei,  gewiß, es war nur Scherz! 

 Und kannst du scherzen, wo es unser ganzes Lebensglück gilt? 
entgegnete Marie.  Morgen will der Vater Ulm verlassen, weil der Krieg
entschieden ist! Wir sehen uns vielleicht lange, lange nicht mehr, und
du magst scherzen? Ach, wenn du gesehen hättest, wie ich so manche
Nacht mit heißen Tränen zu Gott flehte, er möge dein Herz hinüber auf
unsere Seite lenken, er möge uns vor dem Unglück bewahren, auf ewig
getrennt zu sein, gewiß! du könntest nicht so grausam scherzen! 

 Er hat es nicht zum Heil gelenkt,  antwortete Georg, düster vor sich
hinblickend.

 Und sollte es nicht noch möglich sein?  sprach Marie, indem sie
seine Hand faßte und mit dem Ausdruck bittender Zärtlichkeit, mit der
gewinnenden Sanftmut eines Engels ihm ins Auge sah;  sollte es nicht
noch möglich sein? Komm mit uns, Georg, wie gerne wird der Vater einen
jungen Streiter seinem Herzog zuführen! Ein Schwert wiegt viel in
solchen Zeiten, sagte er oft, er wird es dir hoch anschlagen, wenn du
ihm folgst, an seiner Seite wirst du kämpfen, mein Herz wird dann nicht
zerrissen, nicht geteilt sein zwischen jenseits und diesseits; mein
Gebet, wenn es um Glück und Sieg fleht, wird nicht zitternd zwischen
beiden Heeren irren! 

 Halt ein!  rief der Jüngling und bedeckte seine Augen, denn der
Sieg der Ueberzeugung strahlte aus ihren Blicken, die Gewalt der
Wahrheit hatte sich auf ihren süßen Lippen gelagert.  Willst du mich
bereden, ein Ueberläufer zu werden? Gestern zog ich mit dem Heere
ein, heute wird der Krieg erklärt, und morgen soll ich zu dem Herzog
hinüberreiten? Kann dir meine Ehre so gleichgültig sein? 

 Die Ehre?  fragte Marie, und Tränen entstürzten ihrem Auge.  Sie ist
dir also teurer als deine Liebe? Wie anders klang es, als mir Georg
ewige Treue schwur! Wohlan. Sei glücklicher mit ihr als mit mir! Aber
möge dir, wenn dich der Herzog von Bayern auf dem Schlachtfeld zum
Ritter schlägt, weil du in unsern Fluren am schrecklichsten gewütet,
wenn er dir ein Ehrenkettlein umhängt, weil du Württembergs Burgen am
tapfersten gebrochen, möge dir der Gedanke deine Freude nicht trüben,
daß du ein Herz brachst, das dich so treu, so zärtlich liebte! 

 Geliebte!  antwortete Georg, dessen Brust widerstreitende Gefühle
zerrissen,  dein Schmerz läßt dich nicht sehen, wie ungerecht du bist.
Doch es sei! daß du siehest, daß ich den Ruhm, der mir so freundlich
winkte, der Liebe zum Opfer zu bringen weiß, so höre mich: Hinüber zu
euch darf ich nicht, aber ablassen will ich von dem Bunde, möge kämpfen
und siegen, wer da will -- mein Kampf und Sieg war ein Traum, er ist zu
Ende! 

Marie sandte einen Blick des Dankes zum Himmel und belohnte die Worte
des jungen Mannes mit süßem Lohne.  O! glaube mir,  sagte sie,  ich
fühle, wieviel dich dieses Opfer kosten muß; aber sieh mir nicht so
traurig an dein Schwert hinunter: wer frühe entsagt, der erntet schön,
sagt mein Vater; es muß uns doch auch einmal die Sonne des Glückes
scheinen. Jetzt kann ich getrost von dir scheiden; denn wie auch der
Krieg sich enden mag, du kannst ja frei vor meinen Vater treten, und
wie wird er sich freuen, wenn ich ihm sage, welch schweres Opfer du
gebracht hast! 

Berthas helle Stimme, die der Freundin ein Zeichen gab, daß der
Ratsschreiber nicht mehr zurückzuhalten sei, schreckte die Liebenden
auf. Schnell trocknete Marie die Spuren ihrer Tränen und trat mit Georg
aus der Laube.

 Vetter Kraft will aufbrechen,  sagte Bertha,  er fragt, ob der Junker
ihn begleiten wolle? 

 Ich muß wohl, wenn ich den Weg nach Hause nicht verfehlen soll, 
antwortete Georg. So teuer ihm die letzten Augenblicke vor einer langen
Trennung von Marie gewesen wären, so kannte er doch die strenge Sitte
seiner Zeit zu gut, als daß er, ohne den Vetter, als Landfremder bei
den Mädchen geblieben wäre.

Schweigend gingen sie den Garten hinab, nur Herr Dietrich führte
das Wort, indem er in wohlgesetzten Worten seinen Jammer beschrieb,
daß seine Base morgen schon Ulm verlassen werde. Aber Bertha mochte
in Georgs Augen gelesen haben, daß ihm noch etwas zu wünschen übrig
bleibe, wobei der uneingeweihte Zeuge überflüssig war. Sie zog den
Vetter an ihre Seite und befragte ihn so eifrig über eine Pflanze, die
gerade zu seinen Füßen mit ihren ersten Blättern aus der Erde sproßte,
daß er nicht Zeit hatte, zu beobachten, was hinter seinem Rücken
vorgehe.

Schnell benützte Georg diesen Augenblick, Marien noch einmal an sein
Herz zu ziehen, aber das Rauschen von Mariens schwerem seidenen
Gewande, Georgs klirrendes Schwert weckten den Ratsschreiber aus
seinen botanischen Betrachtungen. Er sah sich um, und o Wunder! er
erblickte die ernste, züchtige Base in den Armen seines Gastes.

 Das war wohl ein Gruß an die liebe Base in Franken?  fragte er,
nachdem er sich von seinem Erstaunen erholt hatte.

 Nein, Herr Ratsschreiber,  antwortete Georg,  es war ein Gruß an mich
selbst, und zwar von der, die ich einst heimzuführen gedenke. Ihr habt
doch nichts dagegen, Vetter? 

 Gott bewahre! Ich gratuliere von Herzen,  antwortete Herr Dietrich,
der von dem ernsten Blick des jungen Kriegsmannes und von Mariens
Tränen etwas eingeschüchtert wurde.  Aber der Tausend, das heiß' ich
~veni, vidi, vici~. Ich scherwenzte schon ein Vierteljahr um die Schöne
und habe mich kaum eines Blickes erfreuen können, und heute muß ich nun
gar den Marder selbst herausführen, der mir das Täubchen vor dem Mund
wegstiehlt. 

 Verzeihe den Scherz, Vetter, den wir uns mit dir machten,  fiel ihm
Bertha ins Wort,  sei vernünftig und laß dir die Sache erklären. 
Sie sagte ihm, was er zu wissen brauchte, um gegen Mariens Vater zu
schweigen. Mehr durch die freundlichen Blicke Berthas besänftigt,
versprach er zu schweigen; unter der Bedingung, setzte er schalkhaft
hinzu, daß sie etwa auch einen solchen Gruß an ihn bestelle.

Bertha verwies ihm, wiewohl nicht allzu strenge, seine unartige
Forderung, und fragte ihn neckend an der Gartentüre noch einmal um
die Naturgeschichte des ersten Veilchens, das die Sonne hervorgelockt
hatte. Er war gutmütig genug, eine lange und gelehrte Erklärung darüber
zu geben, ohne weder durch Mariens leises Weinen, noch durch Georgs
klirrendes Schwert sich unterbrechen zu lassen. Ein dankender Blick
Mariens, ein freundlicher Handschlag von Bertha belohnte ihn dafür beim
Scheiden, und noch lange wehten die Schleier der schönen Bäschen über
den Gartenzaun hin, den Scheidenden nach.




8.

    Im stillen Klostergarten
    Eine bleiche Jungfrau ging;
    Der Mond beschien sie trübe,
    An ihrer Wimper hing
    Die Träne zarter Liebe.

            _Uhland._


Ulm glich in den nächsten Tagen einem großen Lager. Statt der
friedlichen Landleute, der geschäftigen Bürger, die sonst ehrbaren und
ruhigen Schrittes ihrem Gewerbe nach durch die Straßen gingen, sah
man überall nur wunderliche Gestalten mit Sturmhauben und Eisenhüten,
mit Lanzen, Armbrüsten und schweren Büchsen. Statt der Ratsherren, in
ihrer einfachen schwarzen Tracht, zogen stolze Ritter, mit wehenden
Helmbüschen, ganz mit Stahl bedeckt, begleitet von einer großen Schar
bewaffneter Dienstleute, über die Plätze und Märkte. Noch lebhafter war
dies kriegerische Bild vor den Toren der Stadt; auf einem Anger an der
Donau übte Sickingen seine Reiterei, auf einem großen Blachfelde gegen
Söflingen hin pflegte Frondsberg sein Fußvolk zu tummeln.

An einem schönen Morgen, etwa drei bis vier Tage, nachdem Marie
von Lichtenstein mit ihrem Vater Ulm verlassen hatte, sah man eine
ungeheure Menge Menschen aus allen Ständen auf jener Wiese versammelt,
um diesen Uebungen Frondsbergs zuzusehen. Sie betrachteten diesen
Mann, dem ein so großer Ruf vorangegangen war, vielleicht mit
nicht geringerem Interesse als wir, wenn wir die kaiserlichen oder
königlichen Söhne des Mars die Dienste eines Feldherrn verrichten
sehen. Knüpft sich ja doch gerade an die Person eines ausgezeichneten
Führers das Interesse, das dem ganzen Heere gilt, ja wir meinen oft,
die Schlachten, von denen uns die Sage oder öffentliche Blätter
erzählen, um so deutlicher zu verstehen, wenn wir die Gestalt des
Heerführers vor das Auge zurückrufen können.

So mochte es wohl auch damals den Bewohnern von Ulm zu Mute sein, wenn
sie ihre engen Straßen verließen, um den Mann des Tages in seinem
Handwerk zu sehen. Die Geschicklichkeit, mit der er sein Fußvolk, das
sonst in zerstreuten Haufen gefochten hatte, zu geschlossenen Massen
vereinigte; die Schnelligkeit, womit sie sich nach seinem Winke nach
allen Seiten schwenkten oder in furchtbare, von Piken und Donnerbüchsen
starrende Kreise zusammenzogen; seine mächtige Stimme, die selbst die
Trommeln übertönte, seine erhabene, kriegerische Gestalt, dies alles
gewährte ein so neues anziehendes Bild, daß auch die bequemsten Bürger
es nicht scheuten, einen langen Vormittag auf dem Anger zu stehen und
unbeweglich dieses Schauspiel zu genießen.

Der Feldhauptmann schien an diesem Morgen noch freundlicher und
fröhlicher zu sein als sonst. Mochte ihn der warme Anteil, den die
guten Ulmer an ihm nahmen, und der auf allen Gesichtern geschrieben
stand, erfreuen? mochte ihm hier außen an dem schönen Morgen, unter
seinen Waffenübungen wohler sein als in den engen, kalten Straßen der
Stadt? Er blickte so freundlich auf die Menge hin, daß jeder glaubte,
von ihm besonders beachtet und begrüßt zu werden, und der Ausruf:  Ein
wackerer Herr, ein braver Ritter!  jedem seiner Schritte folgte.

Besonders freundlich schien er immer an einer Stelle zu sein; wenn er
vorübersprengte, so durfte man gewiß sein, daß er dort mit dem Schwert
oder der Hand herüber grüßte und traulich nickte.

Die Hintersten stellten sich auf die Zehen, um den Gegenstand seiner
freundlichen Winke zu sehen; die Näherstehenden sahen sich fragend
an und verwunderten sich, denn keiner der versammelten Bürger schien
dieser Auszeichnung würdig. Als Frondsberg wieder vorübersprengte und
die Zeichen seiner Gnade wiederholte, gaben wohl hundert Augen recht
genau acht, und es fand sich, daß die Grüße einem großen, schlanken,
jungen Manne gelten mußten, der in der vordersten Reihe der Zuschauer
stand. Das Wams von feinem Tuch und Seidenschlitzen, die hohen
Barettfedern, mit welchen der Morgenwind spielte, sein langes Schwert
und eine Feldbinde oder Schärpe zeichneten ihn auf den ersten Blick
vor seinen Nachbarn aus, die minder geschmückt als er, auch durch
untersetztere Figuren und breite Gesichter sich nicht zu ihrem Vorteil
von ihm unterschieden.

Der Jüngling schien aber zum Aergernis der guten Spießbürger nicht sehr
erfreut über die hohe Gnade, die ihm vor ihren Augen zuteil ward. Schon
seine Stellung, das Haupt gesenkt, die Arme über die Brust gekreuzt,
schien nicht anständig genug für einen feinen Junker, wenn er von einem
alten Kriegshelden gegrüßt wurde. Ueberdies errötete er bei jedem Gruß
des Feldhauptmanns, dankte nur durch ein leichtes Neigen und sah ihm
mit so düsteren Blicken nach, als gälte es ein langes Scheiden, und
dieser Gruß wäre der letzte eines lieben Freundes gewesen.

 Ein sonderbarer Kauz der Junker dort,  sagte der Obermeister aller
Ulmer Weber zu seinem Nachbar, einem wackeren Waffenschmied;  ich gäbe
mein Sonntagswams um einen solchen Gruß von dem Frondsberger, und
dieser da muckt nicht darüber. Hieße es nicht in der ganzen Stadt: Was
hat der Meister Kohler mit dem Frondsberg? Waren ja neulich miteinander
wie zwei Brüder. O, die kennen einander schon lange, hieß es dann, und
sind gute Freunde von alters her. Ich kann mich ordentlich ärgern,
daß ein so gescheiter und gewaltiger Herr solch einen Laffen alle
Paternoster lang grüßt. 

Der Waffenschmied, ein kleiner, alter Kerl, hatte ihm seinen Beifall
zugenickt.  Gott straf' mich, Ihr habt recht, Meister Kohler! Stehen
nicht dort ganz andre Leut', die er grüßen könnte? Ist nicht der Herr
Bürgermeister auf dem Platz, und steht dort nicht mein Gevatter, der
Herr von Besserer, am Eck? Ich wollt' dem Junker den Kopf beugen
lernen, wenn ich Herr wäre; aber glaubt mir, der da beugt seinen Nacken
nicht, und wenn der Kaiser selbst käme. Er muß auch etwas Rechtes sein,
denn der Ratsschreiber, mein Nachbar, der sonst allen Gästen feind ist,
hat ihn in seiner Behausung. 

 Der Kraft?  fragte der Weber verwundert.  Ei, ei! Aber halt, dahinter
steckt ein Geheimnis. Das ist gewiß so ein junger Potentat oder gar des
Bürgermeisters von Köln sein Sohn, der auch unter dem Heer mitreiten
soll. Steht nicht dort des Kraften alter Johann? 

 Weiß Gott, er ist's,  fiel der Waffenschmied ein, den die Vermutungen
des Webers neugierig gemacht hatten;  er ist's, und ich will ihn
beichten lassen, trotz dem Propst von Elchingen.  Aber so klein
auch der Raum zwischen den beiden Bürgern und dem alten Diener des
Kraftischen Hauses war, so konnte doch der Schmied nicht zu ihm
durchkommen, so dicht standen die Zuschauer. Endlich drang die
gewichtige Miene des Obermeisters aller Weber durch, denn er war reich
und angesehen in der Stadt; er erwischte den alten Johann und zog
ihn zu dem Schmied. Doch auch der alte Johann konnte wenig Bescheid
geben, er wußte nichts, als daß sein Gast ein Herr von Sturmfeder sei.
 Uebrigens muß er nicht ›weit her‹ sein,  setzte er hinzu,  denn er
reitet ein Landpferd und hat keine Dienstleute mit sich; meinem Herrn
aber wird der Gast übel bekommen, denn unsere alte Sabine, die Amme,
ist wie ein Drache, daß er die Hausordnung stört und ungefragt, nur so
mir nichts dir nichts, ein fremdes Menschenkind mit Stiefeln und Sporen
ins Haus schleppt. 

 Nichts für ungut,  fiel ihm der Obermeister in die Rede,  Euer Herr,
Johann, ist ein Narr! Die alte Hexe -- Gott verzeih mir's -- hätte ich
schon lange auf die Straße geworfen, wo sie hingehört. Hat der Herr
doch sein gutes Alter, und soll sich behandeln lassen, als läge er noch
in den Windeln. 

 Ihr habt gut reden, Meister Kohler,  antwortete der alte Diener,  aber
das versteht Ihr doch nicht recht. Auf die Gasse werfen? Wer soll denn
nachher haushalten? 

 Wer?  schrie der erhitzte Weber.  Wer? Ein Weib soll er nehmen,
eine Hausfrau wie ein anderer Christ und Ulmer Bürger auch; was hat
er nötig, als Junggeselle zu leben und allen Mädchen in der Stadt
nachzulaufen? Hab' ich ihn nicht neulich angetroffen, wie er meiner
Katharine schön getan hat? Schiff und Geschirr hätte ich ihm mögen an
den Kopf werfen, dem gestrengen Herrn, so aber -- seine Mutter selig
hat manch schönes Tafelstück bei mir weben lassen, die brave Frau -- so
mußt' ich meine Mütze abziehen und sagen: ›Gehorsamen guten Abend, und
was befehlen Euer Wohledlen?‹ Daß dich der -- 

 Ei, schau' einer!  sagte Johann mit unmutigem Gesicht;  ich habe
immer gedacht, ein Herr wie der Ratsschreiber, mein Herr, könne in
allen Ehren mit Eurem Töchterlein ein Wort wechseln, ohne daß die böse
Welt -- 

 So? Ein Wort wechseln, und abends nach der Vesperglock' im März? Er
heiratet sie doch nicht, und meint Ihr, meines Kindes guter Ruf müsse
nicht so rein sein wie Eures Herrn weiße Halskrause? Das könnt' ich
brauchen! 

Der Obermeister hatte während seiner eifrigen Reden den alten Johann
an der Brust gepackt und seine Stimme so erhoben, daß die Umstehenden
aufmerksam wurden; der Meister Schmied hielt es daher für das beste,
den Erzürnten mit Gewalt wegzuziehen, und er verhütete so zwar weitere
Streitigkeiten, doch konnte er nicht verhüten, daß es schon mittags in
der ganzen Stadt hieß: Herr von Kraftens Johann habe noch in seinen
alten Tagen eine Liebschaft mit des Obermeisters Töchterlein und sei
von dem erzürnten Vater auf der Wiese darüber zur Rede gestellt worden.

Die Uebungen des Fußvolks waren indes zu Ende gegangen, das Volk
verlief sich, und auch den jungen Mann, der die unschuldige Ursache zu
jenem Streit gewesen war, sah man seine Schritte der Stadt zuwenden;
sein Gang war langsam und ungleich, sein Gesicht schien bleicher als
sonst, seine Blicke suchten noch immer den Boden oder schweiften mit
dem Ausdruck von Sehnsucht oder stillem Gram nach den fernen blauen
Bergen, den Grenzmauern von Württemberg.

Noch nie hatte sich Georg von Sturmfeder so unglücklich gefühlt als
in diesen Stunden. Marie war mit ihrem Vater abgereist; sie hatte ihn
noch einmal beschwören lassen, seinem Versprechen treu zu sein, und wie
unglücklich machte ihn dieses Versprechen! Wohl hatte es ihn damals
nicht geringen Kampf gekostet, es zu geben; aber der betäubende Schmerz
des Abschiedes, der Gram des geliebten Mädchens hatten überwunden.
Doch jetzt, wo er mit festerem Blicke seinen Umgebungen, seiner
Zukunft ins Auge sah, wie traurig, wie schwierig erschien ihm seine
Lage! Nichts davon zu sagen, daß alle seine goldenen Träume, alle jene
kühnen Hoffnungen von Ruhm und Ehre mit einem Mal verschwanden; nichts
davon zu sagen, daß auch sein Ziel, das so nahe lag, Marien durch
Kriegsdienste zu verdienen, ungewiß in die Weite hinausgerückt war --
er sollte auf die Gefahr hin, von Männern, deren Achtung ihm teuer war,
verkannt zu werden, diese Fahnen verlassen, gerade in einem Augenblick,
wo man der Entscheidung entgegenging. Von Tag zu Tag, solange es ihm
nur möglich war, verschob er diese Erklärung; wo sollte er Gründe, wo
Worte hernehmen, vor dem alten, tapfern Degen Breitenstein, seinem
väterlichen Freunde, seinen Abzug zu rechtfertigen? Mit welcher Stirne
sollte er vor den edlen Frondsberg treten! Ach! jene freundlichen
Grüße, womit er den Sohn seines tapfern Waffengenossen zu freudigem
Kampfe aufzumuntern schien, hatten ihn mit tausend Qualen gefoltert.
An seiner Seite war sein Vater gefallen, er hatte gehört, wie der
Sterbende den Ruhm seines Namens und ein leuchtendes Beispiel als
einziges Erbe dem unmündigen Knaben zusandte; dieser Mann war es, der
ihm jetzt so liebevoll die Schranken öffnete, und auch ihm mußte er in
so zweideutigem Lichte erscheinen.

Er hatte sich unter diesen trüben Gedanken langsam dem Tore der Stadt
genähert, als er sich plötzlich am Arm ergriffen fühlte; er sah sich
um, ein Mann, dem Anschein nach ein Bauer, stand vor ihm.

 Was willst du?  fragte Georg, etwas unwillig, in seinen Gedanken
unterbrochen zu werden.

 Es kommt darauf an, ob Ihr auch der Rechte seid,  antwortete der Mann.
 Sagt einmal, was gehört zu _Licht_ und _Sturm_? 

Georg wunderte sich ob der sonderbaren Frage und betrachtete jenen
genauer. Er war nicht groß, aber kräftig; seine Brust war breit, seine
Gestalt gedrungen. Das Gesicht, von der Sonne braun gefärbt, wäre
flach und unbedeutend gewesen, wenn nicht ein eigener Zug von List und
Schlauheit um den Mund und aus den grauen Augen Mut und Verwegenheit
geleuchtet hätten. Sein Haar und Bart war dunkelgelb und gerollt; er
trug einen langen Dolch im ledernen Gurt, in der einen Hand hielt er
eine Axt, in der andern eine runde, niedere Mütze von Leder, wie man
sie noch heute bei dem schwäbischen Landvolk sieht.

Während Georg diese flüchtigen Bemerkungen machte, wurden auch seine
Züge lauernd beobachtet.

 Ihr habt mich vielleicht nicht recht verstanden, Herr Ritter,  fuhr
jener nach kurzem Stillschweigen fort;  was paßt zu Licht und Sturm,
daß es zwei gute Namen gibt? 

 Feder und Stein!  antwortete der junge Mann, dem es auf einmal klar
wurde, was unter jener Frage verstanden sei;  was willst du damit? 

 So seid Ihr Georg von Sturmfeder,  sagte jener,  und ich komme von
Marien von -- 

 Um Gottes willen sei still, Freund, und nenne keinen Namen,  fiel
Georg ein,  sage schnell, was du mir bringst. 

 Ein Brieflein, Junker!  sprach der Bauer, indem er die breiten,
schwarzen Kniegürtel, womit er seine ledernen Beinkleider umwunden
hatte, auflöste und einen Streifen Pergament hervorzog.

Mit hastiger Freude nahm Georg das Pergament; es waren wenige Worte,
mit glänzend schwarzer Tinte geschrieben; den Zügen der Schrift sah
man aber an, daß sie einige Mühe gekostet haben mochten, denn die
Mädchen von 1519 waren nicht so flink mit der Feder, um ihre zärtlichen
Gefühle auszudrücken, als die in unseren Tagen, wo jede Dorfschöne
ihrem Geliebten zum Regiment eine Epistel, so lang als die dritte
St. Johannis, schreiben kann. Die Chronik, woraus wir diese Historie
genommen, hat uns jene Worte aufbewahrt, welche Georgs gierige Blicke
aus den verworrenen Zügen des Pergaments entzifferten:

     Bedenk' deinen Eid, -- Flieh bei Zeit.
    Gott dein Geleit. -- Marie dein in Ewigkeit. 

Es liegt ein frommer, zarter Sinn in diesen Worten; und wer sich ein
liebendes Herz dazu denkt, wie es mit diesen Zeilen in die Ferne
fliegen möchte, ein Auge voll Zärtlichkeit, umflort von einem Schleier
stiller Tränen, einen holden Mund, der das Blättchen noch einmal küßt,
verschämte Wangen, die bei diesem geheimnisvollen Gruße erröten, wer
dies hinzu denkt, der wird es Georg nicht verargen, daß er einige
Augenblicke wie trunken war. Ein freudiger, glänzender Blick, nach den
fernen blauen Bergen hin, dankte der Geliebten für ihren tröstenden
Spruch; und wahrlich, er war auch zu keiner andern Zeit nötiger gewesen
als gerade jetzt, um den gesunkenen Mut des jungen Mannes zu heben.
Wußte er doch, daß ein Wesen, das teuerste, was für ihn auf der Erde
lebte, ihn nicht verkannte. Der Schluß jener Zeilen erhob sein Herz zur
alten Freudigkeit, er bot dem guten Boten die Hand, dankte ihm herzlich
und fragte, wie er zu diesen Zeilen gekommen sei.

 Dacht' ich's doch,  antwortete dieser,  daß das Blättchen keinen
bösen Zauberspruch enthalten müsse; denn das Fräulein lächelte so
gar freundlich, als sie es mir in die rauhe Hand drückte. Es war
vergangenen Mittwoch, als ich nach Blaubeuren kam, wo unser Kriegsvolk
stand. Es ist dort in der Klosterkirche ein prächtiger Hochaltar,
worauf die Geschichte meines Patrons, des Täufers Johannes, vorgestellt
ist. Vor sieben Jahren, als ich in großer Not und einem schmählichen
Ende nahe war, gelobte ich alle Jahre um diese Zeit eine Wallfahrt
dahin. So hielt ich es alle Jahre seit der Zeit, da mich der Heilige
durch ein Wunder von Henkers Hand errettet hat. Wenn ich nun mein Gebet
verrichtet hatte, ging ich allemal zum Herrn Abt, um ihm ein paar
schöne Gänse oder ein Lamm zu bringen, oder was er sonst gerade gern
hat. -- Aber ich mache Euch Langeweile mit meinem Geschwätz, Junker? 

 Nein, nein, erzähle nur weiter,  antwortete Georg,  komm, setze dich
zu mir auf jene Bank. 

 Das würde sich schön schicken!  entgegnete der Bote,  wenn ein Bauer
an des Junkers Seite sitzen wollte, den der Oberfeldhauptmann vor aller
Augen so oft gegrüßt hat; erlaubt mir, daß ich mich vor Euch hinstelle. 

Georg ließ sich auf einen Steinsitz am Wege nieder, der Bauer aber
fuhr, auf seine Axt gestützt, in seiner Erzählung fort:  Ich hatte
diesmal bei den unruhigen Zeiten wenig Lust zur Wallfahrt, aber
›gebrochener Eid tut Gott leid‹, heißt es, und so mußte ich mein
Gelübde vollbringen. Wie ich vom Gebet aufstand, um dem Abt zu bringen,
was recht ist, sagte mir einer der Pfaffen, daß ich diesmal nicht zu
Seiner Ehrwürden könne, weil viele Herren und Ritter dort zu Besuch
seien. Ich bestand aber doch darauf, denn der Abt ist ein leutseliger
Herr und hätte mir's nicht verziehen, wenn ich ihn nicht heimgesucht
hätte. Wenn ihr je ins Kloster hinauskommt, so vergesset nicht nach der
Treppe zu schauen, die vom Hochaltar zum Dorment führt. Sie geht durch
die dicke Mauer, welche die Kirche ans Kloster schließt, und ist lang
und schmal. Dort war es, wo mir das Fräulein begegnet ist. Es kommt mir
nämlich ein feines Weibsbild im Schleier mit Brevier und Rosenkranz die
Treppe herab entgegen; ich drücke mich an die Wand, um sie vorbei zu
lassen, sie aber bleibt stehen und spricht: ›Ei Hans, woher des Weges?‹ 

 Woher kennt Euch denn das Fräulein?  unterbrach ihn Georg.

 Meine Schwester ist ihre Amme und -- 

 Wie, die alte Rose ist Eure Schwester?  rief der junge Mann.

 Habt Ihr sie auch gekannt?  sagte der Bote.  Ei, seh' doch einer! Aber
daß ich weiter sage: Ich hatte eine große Freude, sie wiederzusehen,
denn ich besuchte meine Schwester häufig in Lichtenstein und habe
das Fräulein gekannt, als man sie noch in ihres Vaters Schwertkuppel
gehen lernte. Aber ich hätte sie kaum wiedererkannt, so groß war sie
geworden, und die roten Wangen sind auch weg wie der Schnee am ersten
Mai. Ich weiß nicht, wie es ging, aber mich dauerte ihr Anblick in der
Seele, und ich mußte fragen, was ihr fehle, und ob ich ihr nicht etwas
helfen könne? Sie besann sich eine Weile und sagte dann: ›Ja, wenn du
verschwiegen wärest, Hans, könntest du mir wohl einen großen Dienst
leisten!‹ Ich sagte zu, und sie bestellte mich bis nach der Vesper. 

 Aber wie kommt sie nur in das Kloster?  fragte Georg.  Sonst darf ja
doch kein Weiberschuh über die Schwelle. 

 Der Abt ist mit ihrem Vater befreundet, und da so viel Volk in
Blaubeuren liegt, so ist sie dort besser aufgehoben als im Städtchen,
wo es toll genug zugeht. Nach der Vesper, als alles still war, kam
sie ganz leise in den Kreuzgang. Ich sprach ihr Mut zu, wie es eben
unsereins versteht, da gab sie mir dies Blättchen und bat mich, Euch
aufzusuchen. 

 Ich danke dir herzlich, guter Hans,  sagte der Jüngling.  Aber hat sie
dir sonst nichts an mich aufgetragen? 

 Ja,  antwortete der Bote,  mündlich hat sie mir noch etwas
aufgetragen; Ihr sollt Euch hüten, man habe etwas mit Euch vor. 

 Mit mir?  rief Georg,  das hast du nicht recht gehört, wer und was
soll man mit mir vorhaben? 

 Da fragt Ihr mich zu viel,  entgegnete jener;  aber wenn ich es
sagen darf, so glaube ich, die Bündischen. Das Fräulein setzte noch
hinzu, ihr Vater habe davon gesprochen, und hat nicht der Frondsberg
Euch heute zugewinkt und Euch geehrt wie des Kaisers Sohn, daß sich
jedermann darob verwunderte? Glaubt nur, es hat allemal etwas zu
bedeuten, wenn solch ein Herr so freundlich ist. 

Georg war überrascht von der richtigen Bemerkung des schlichten Bauers;
er entsann sich auch, daß Mariens Vater tief in die Geheimnisse der
Bundesobersten eingedrungen sei und vielleicht etwas erfahren habe, was
sich zunächst auf ihn bezöge. Aber er mochte sinnen, wie er wollte, so
konnte er doch nichts finden, was zu dieser geheimnisvollen Warnung
Mariens gepaßt hätte. Mit Mühe riß er sich aus diesem Gewebe von
Vermutungen, indem er den Boten fragte, wie er ihn so schnell gefunden
habe?

 Dies wäre ohne Frondsberg so bald nicht geschehen,  antwortete er;
 ich sollte Euch bei Herrn Dietrich von Kraft aufsuchen. Wie ich aber
die Straße hereinging, da sah man viel Volk auf den Wiesen. Ich dachte,
eine halbe Stunde mache nichts aus, und stellte mich auch hin, um das
Fußvolk zu betrachten. Wahrlich, der Frondsberg hat es weit gebracht.
-- Nun, da war mir's, als hörte ich nahe bei mir Euren Namen nennen;
ich sah mich um, es waren drei alte Männer, die sprachen von Euch und
deuteten auf Euch hin, ich aber merkte mir Eure Gestalt und folgte
Euren Schritten, und weil ich meiner Sache doch nicht ganz gewiß war,
so gab ich Euch das Rätsel von Sturm und Licht auf. 

 Das hast du klug gemacht,  sagte Georg lächelnd;  aber dennoch komm
in mein Haus, daß man dir etwas zu essen reiche. Wann kehrst du wieder
heim? 

Hans bedachte sich eine Weile; endlich aber sagte er, indem ein
schlaues Lächeln um seinen Mund zog:  Nichts für ungut, Junker; aber
ich habe dem Fräulein versprechen müssen, nicht eher von Euch zu
weichen, als bis Ihr dem bündischen Heer Valet gesagt habt. 

 Und dann?  fragte Georg.

 Und dann gehe ich stracks nach Lichtenstein und bringe ihr die gute
Nachricht von Euch; wie wird sie sich sehnen! Alle Tage steht sie wohl
im Gärtchen auf dem Felsen und sieht ins Tal hinab, ob der alte Hans
noch nicht kommt! 

 Die Freude soll ihr bald werden,  antwortete Georg,  vielleicht reite
ich schon morgen, und dann schreibe ich vorher noch ein Brieflein. 

 Aber greifet es doch klug an,  sagte der Bote,  das Pergament darf
nicht breiter sein als jenes, das ich brachte; denn ich muß es wieder
im Kniegürtel verstecken. Man weiß nicht, was einem in so unruhiger
Zeit begegnen kann, und dort sucht es niemand. 

 Es sei so,  antwortete Georg, indem er aufstand.  Für jetzt lebe
wohl; um Mittag komme zu Herrn von Kraft, nicht weit vom Münster. Gib
dich für meinen Landsmann aus Franken aus, denn die Ulmer sind den
Württembergern nicht grün. 

 Sorget nicht, Ihr sollt zufrieden sein,  rief Hans dem Scheidenden
zu. Er sah dem schlanken Jüngling nach und gestand sich, daß das holde
Pflegekind seiner Schwester keine üble Wahl getroffen habe, wenn auch
die rosigen Wangen des Kindes bei der ersten Liebe der Jungfrau etwas
von ihren blühenden Farben verloren hatten.




9.

    Was unter dieser Sonne kann es geben,
    Das ich nicht hinzuopfern eilen will,
    Wenn Sie es wünschen? -- Fliehen Sie!

            _Schiller._


Georg war es von Anfang bange, wie sich sein neuer Bekannter in dem
Kraftischen Hause benehmen werde. Er fürchtete nicht ohne Grund, jener
möchte sich durch seine Mundart, durch unbedachte Aeußerungen verraten,
was ihm höchst unangenehm gewesen wäre; denn je fester er bei sich
beschlossen hatte, das Bundesheer in den nächsten Tagen zu verlassen,
um so weniger mochte er in den Verdacht geraten, in Verbindung mit
Württemberg zu stehen. Konnte und durfte er ja doch im schlimmen Falle,
wenn der Bote entdeckt würde, wenn er bekannte, an ihn geschickt
worden zu sein, die Geliebte nicht verraten. Er wollte umkehren und
den Mann aufsuchen, ihn bitten, sich sobald als möglich zu entfernen,
aber als er bedachte, daß dieser schon längst von dem Platz ihrer
Unterredung sich entfernt haben müsse, daß er indes zu Kraft kommen
könne, schien es ihm geratener, dahin vorauszueilen, um jenem dort die
nötigen Winke zu geben und ihn vor Unvorsichtigkeit zu bewahren.

Und doch, wenn er sich das kühne Auge, die kluge, verschlagene Miene
des Mannes ins Gedächtnis rief, glaubte er hoffen zu dürfen, daß Marie,
obgleich ihr keine große Wahl übrig blieb, keinem unsicheren Mann diese
Botschaft anvertraut haben konnte.

Und wirklich traute er seinem Auge, seinem Ohr kaum, als ihm um Mittag
ein Landsmann aus Franken gemeldet und sein Liebesbote hereingeführt
ward. Welche Gewalt mußte dieser Mensch über sich haben! Es war
derselbe, und doch schien er ein ganz anderer. Er ging gebückt, die
Arme hingen schlaff an dem Körper herab, selten schlug er die Augen
auf, sein Gesicht hatte einen Ausdruck von Blödigkeit, der Georg ein
unwillkürliches Lächeln abnötigte. Und als er dann zu sprechen anfing,
als er ihn in fränkischer Mundart begrüßte und mit der geläufigen
Zunge eines geborenen Franken dem Herrn von Kraft auf seine mancherlei
Fragen antwortete, da kam er in Versuchung, an übernatürliche Dinge
zu glauben, die Märchen seiner Kindheit stiegen in seinem Gedächtnisse
auf, wo ein freundlicher Zauberer oder eine huldreiche Fee in allerlei
Gestalten dem Dienst zweier Liebenden sich widmet und sie glücklich
mitten durch das feindselige Schicksal hindurchführt.

Der Zauber war bald gelöst, als er mit dem Boten auf seinem Zimmer
allein war und ihn der gute Schwabe von seiner Persönlichkeit
versicherte; aber doch konnte er ihm seine Bewunderung nicht versagen
über die Rolle, die er so gut gespielt.

 Glaubt deshalb nicht minder an meine Ehrlichkeit,  antwortete der
Bauer;  man wird oft genötigt, von Jugend auf durch solche Künste sich
fortzuhelfen, sie schaden keinem und tun doch dem gut, der sie kann. 

Georg versicherte, ihm nicht minder zu trauen als vorher, der Bote
aber bat dringend, er möchte doch jetzt auch auf seine Abreise denken,
er möchte bedenken, wie sehr sich das Fräulein nach dieser Nachricht
sehne, daß er nicht früher heimkehren dürfe, als bis er diese Gewißheit
bringen könne.

Georg antwortete ihm, daß er nur noch den Abmarsch des Bundesheeres
abwarten wolle, um in seine Heimat zurückzukehren.

 O, da braucht Ihr nicht mehr lange zu warten,  antwortete der Bote;
 wenn sie morgen nicht aufbrechen, so ist es übermorgen, denn das Land
ist offen bis ins Herz hinein. Ich darf Euch trauen, Junker, darum sag'
ich Euch dies. 

 Ist es denn wahr, daß die Schweizer abgezogen sind,  fragte Georg,
 und daß der Herzog keine Feldschlacht mehr liefern kann? 

Der Bote warf einen lauernden Blick im Zimmer umher, öffnete behutsam
die Türe, und als er sah, daß kein Lauscher in der Nähe sei, begann er:

 Herr! ich war bei einem Auftritt, den ich nie vergesse, und wenn
ich neunzig Jahre alt werde! Schon unterwegs waren mir auf der Alb
große Scharen der heimziehenden Schweizer begegnet; ihre Räte und
Landammänner hatten sie heimgerufen; bei Blaubeuren standen aber noch
über achttausend Mann, jedoch lauter gute Württemberger und nichts
anderes drunter. 

 Und der Herzog,  unterbrach ihn Georg,  wo war denn dieser? 

 Der Herzog hat in Kirchheim zum letztenmal mit den Schweizern
unterhandelt, aber sie zogen ab, weil er sie nicht bezahlen konnte.[16]
Da kam er gen Blaubeuren, wo sich sein Landvolk gelagert hatte.
Gestern morgen wurde durch Trommelschlag bekannt gemacht, daß sich bis
neun Uhr alles Volk auf den Klosterwiesen einstellen solle. Es waren
viele Männer, die dort versammelt waren, aber jeder dachte ein und
dasselbe. Seht, Junker! der Herzog Ulrich ist ein gestrenger Herr und
weiß den Bauer nicht für sich zu gewinnen. Die Steuern sind hart, der
Jagdfrevel ist scharf und grausam, am Hof aber wird verpraßt, was man
uns genommen hat. Aber wenn ein solcher Herr im Unglück ist, da ist
es gleich ein anderes Ding. Jetzt fiel uns allen nur ein, daß er ein
tapferer Mann und unser unglücklicher Herzog sei, dem man das Land mit
Gewalt entreißen wolle. Es ging ein Gemurmel unter uns, der Herzog
wolle eine Schlacht liefern, und jeder drückte das Schwert fester in
der Hand, grimmig schüttelten sie ihre Speere und riefen den Bündlern
Verwünschungen zu. Da kam der Herzog -- 

 Du sahst den Herzog, du kennst ihn?  rief Georg neugierig.  O sprich,
wie sieht er aus? 

 Ob ich ihn kenne?  sagte der Bote mit sonderbarem Lächeln.
 Wahrhaftig, ich sah ihn, als es ihm nicht wohl war, mich zu sehen. Der
Herr ist noch ein junger Mann, wenn es viel ist, ist er zweiunddreißig
Jahr. Er ist stattlich und kräftig, und man sieht ihm an, daß er die
Waffen zu führen weiß. Augen hat er wie Feuer, und es lebt keiner,
der ihm lange hineinschaute. -- Der Herzog trat in den Kreis, den das
bewaffnete Volk geschlossen hatte, und es war Totenstille unter den
vielen Menschen. Mit vernehmlicher Stimme sprach er, daß er sich, also
verlassen, nimmer zu helfen wüßte.[17] Diejenigen, worauf er gehofft,
seien ihm benommen, seinen Feinden sei er ein Spott; denn ohne die
Schweizer könne er keine Schlacht wagen. Da trat ein alter, eisgrauer
Mann hervor, der sprach: ›Herr Herzog! Habt Ihr unsern Arm schon
versucht, daß Ihr die Hoffnung aufgebt? Schaut, diese alle wollen für
Euch bluten; ich habe Euch auch meine vier Buben mitgebracht, hat jeder
einen Spieß und ein Messer, und so sind hier viele Tausend; seid Ihr
des Landes so müde, daß Ihr uns verschmäht?‹ Da brach dem Ulrich das
Herz; er wischte sich Tränen aus dem Auge und bot dem Alten seine Hand.
›Ich zweifle nicht an eurem Mut,‹ sprach er mit lauter Stimme; ›aber
wir sind unserer zu wenig, so daß wir nur sterben können, aber nicht
siegen. Geht nach Haus, ihr guten Leute, und bleibet mir treu. Ich muß
mein Land verlassen und im bitteren Elend sein. Aber mit Gottes Hilfe
hoffe ich auch wieder hereinzukommen.‹ So sprach der Herzog, unsere
Leute aber weinten und knirschten mit den Zähnen und zogen ab in Trauer
und Unmut. [18]

 Und der Herzog?  fragte Georg.

 Von Blaubeuren ist er weggeritten, wohin, weiß man nicht. In den
Schlössern aber liegt die Ritterschaft, sie zu verteidigen, bis der
Herzog vielleicht andere Hilfe bekommt.  --

Der alte Johann unterbrach hier den Boten und meldete, daß der Junker
auf zwei Uhr in den Kriegsrat beschieden sei, der in Frondsbergs
Quartier gehalten werde; Georg war nicht wenig erstaunt über diese
Nachricht, was konnte man von ihm im Kriegsrat wollen? Sollte
Frondsberg schon ein Mittel gefunden haben, ihn zu empfehlen?

 Nehmt Euch in acht, Junker,  sprach der Bote, als der alte Johann
das Gemach verlassen hatte,  und bedenkt das Versprechen, das Ihr dem
Fräulein gegeben; vor allem erinnert Euch, was sie Euch sagen ließ: Ihr
sollt Euch hüten, weil man etwas mit Euch vorhabe. Mir aber erlaubt,
als Euer Diener in diesem Haus zu bleiben; ich kann Euer Pferd
besorgen und bin zu jedem Dienst erbötig. 

Georg nahm das Anerbieten des treuen Mannes mit Dank an, und Hans trat
auch sogleich in seinen Dienst, denn er band seinem jungen Herrn das
Schwert um und setzte ihm das Barett zurecht. Er bat ihn noch unter der
Türe, seines Schwures und jener Warnung eingedenk zu sein.

Dem unbegreiflichen Ruf in den Kriegsrat und der sonderbar zutreffenden
Warnung Mariens nachsinnend, ging Georg dem bezeichneten Hause zu; man
wies ihn dort eine breite Wendeltreppe hinan, wo er in der ersten Türe
rechts die Kriegsobersten versammelt finden sollte. Aber der Eingang in
dieses Heiligtum ward ihm nicht so bald verstattet; ein alter bärtiger
Kriegsmann fragte, als er die Tür öffnen wollte, nach seinem Begehr und
gab ihm den schlechten Trost, es könne höchstens noch eine halbe Stunde
dauern, bis er vorgelassen werde; zugleich ergriff er die Hand des
jungen Mannes und führte ihn, einen schmalen Gang hindurch, nach einem
kleinen Gemach, wo er sich einstweilen gedulden solle.

Wer je in besorgter Erwartung einsam und allein auf der Marterbank
eines Vorzimmers saß, der kennt die Qual, die Georg in jener Stunde
auszustehen hatte. Das ungeduldige Herz pocht der Entscheidung
entgegen, alle Nerven sind gespannt, das Auge möchte die Tür
durchbohren, das Ohr schärft sich, wenn in der Ferne eine Türe
knarrt, Schritte über den Hausgang rauschen oder undeutliche Stimmen
im anstoßenden Zimmer lauter werden. Aber die Türen haben umsonst
getönt, die Schritte, immer näher und näher kommend, gehen vorüber,
der ungleiche Ton der Stimmen sinkt zum Geflüster herab. Die Bretter
des Fußbodens und die Fenster des Nachbarhauses sind bald gezählt, und
schon wieder zeigt der helle Ton der Glocke eine umsonst verlebte halbe
Stunde an. Das Ohr begleitet alle Glocken und Uhren der Stadt, bemerkt
ihre hohen und tiefen Töne -- auch sie haben ausgeschlagen; man steht
auf, macht einen Gang durch das enge Gemach, horch! da geht wieder eine
Türe, gewichtige Schritte kommen den Gang herauf, die Klinke der Türe
bewegt sich nach so langer Zeit wieder.

 Georg von Frondsberg läßt Euch seinen Gruß vermelden,  sprach der alte
Kriegsmann, der nach so langer Zeit wieder zu Georg kam,  es könne
vielleicht noch eine Weile dauern; doch sei dies ungewiß, darum sollet
Ihr hier bleiben. Er schickt Euch hier einen Krug Wein zum Vespern. 

Der Diener setzte den Wein auf den breiten Fenstersims des Zimmers,
denn ein Tisch war nicht vorhanden, und verließ das Gemach.

Georg sah ihm staunend nach; er hätte dies nicht für möglich gehalten;
über eine Stunde war schon verschwunden, und noch nicht? Er griff zu
dem Wein, er war nicht übel, aber wie konnte ihm in seiner traurigen
Einsamkeit das Glas munden?

Es ist ein gewöhnlicher Fehler junger Leute in Georgs Jahren, daß sie
sich für wichtiger halten, als es ihre Stellung in der Welt eigentlich
mit sich bringt. Der gereifte Mann wird eine Beeinträchtigung seiner
Würde eher verschmerzen oder wenigstens sein Mißfallen zurückhalten,
während der Jüngling, empfindlicher über den Punkt der Ehre, leichter
und schneller aufbraust. Kein Wunder daher, daß Georg, als er nach zwei
tödlich langen Stunden in den Kriegsrat abgeholt wurde, nicht in der
besten Laune war. Er folgte schweigend dem ergrauten Führer, der ihn
hieher geleitet hatte, den langen Gang hin.

An der Türe wandte sich jener um und sagte freundlich:  Verschmäht den
Rat eines alten Mannes nicht, Junker, und legt die trotzige finstere
Miene ab; es tut nicht gut bei den gestrengen Herrn da drinnen. 

Georg war in dem Augenblick zu wenig Herr über sich, als daß er den
wohlgemeinten Rat hätte befolgen können, er dankte ihm durch einen
Händedruck, ergriff dann rasch die gewaltige eiserne Türklinke, und die
schwere eichene Zimmertüre drehte sich ächzend auf.

Um einen großen schwerfälligen Tisch saßen acht ältliche Männer, die
den Kriegsrat des Bundes bildeten. Einige davon kannte Georg. Jörg
Truchseß, Freiherr von Waldburg, nahm als Oberst-Feldleutnant den
obersten Platz an dem Tische ein, zu beiden Seiten von ihm saßen
Frondsberg und Franz von Sickingen, von den übrigen kannte er keinen
als den alten Ludwig von Hutten; aber die Chronik hat uns ihre Namen
treulich aufbewahrt; es saßen dort noch Christoph Graf zu Ortenberg,
Alban von Closen, Christoph von Frauenberg und Diepolt von Stein,
bejahrte, im Heere angesehene Männer.

Georg war an der Türe stehen geblieben, Frondsberg aber winkte
ihm freundlich, näher zu kommen. Er trat nun bis an den Tisch und
überschaute nun mit dem freien kühnen Blick, der ihm so eigen war, die
Versammlung. Aber auch er wurde von den Versammelten beobachtet, und
es schien, als fänden sie Gefallen an dem schönen, hochgewachsenen
Jüngling, denn mancher Blick ruhte mit Wohlwollen auf ihm, einige
nickten ihm sogar freundlich zu.

Der Truchseß von Waldburg hob endlich an:  Georg von Sturmfeder,
wir haben uns sagen lassen, Ihr seid auf der Hochschule in Tübingen
gewesen, ist dem also? 

 Ja, Herr Ritter,  antwortete Georg.

 Seid Ihr in der Gegend von Tübingen genau bekannt?  fuhr jener fort.

Georg errötete bei dieser Frage; er dachte an die Geliebte, die ja nur
wenige Stunden von jener Stadt entfernt auf ihrem Lichtenstein war;
doch er faßte sich bald und sagte:  Ich kam zwar nicht viel auf die
Jagd, auch habe ich sonst die Gegend wenig durchstreift, doch ist sie
mir im allgemeinen bekannt. 

 Wir haben beschlossen,  fuhr Truchseß fort,  einen sicheren Mann
in jene Gegend zu schicken, auszukundschaften, was der Herzog
von Württemberg bei unserm Anzug tun wird. Es soll auch über die
Befestigung des Schlosses Tübingen, über die Stimmung des Landvolkes in
jener Gegend genaue Nachricht eingezogen werden; ein solcher Mann kann
dem Württemberger durch Klugheit und List mehr Abbruch tun als hundert
Reiter, und wir haben -- Euch dazu ausersehen. 

 Mich?  rief Georg voll Schrecken.

 Euch, Georg von Sturmfeder; zwar gehört Uebung und Erfahrung zu einem
solchen Geschäft, aber was Euch daran abgeht, möge Euer Kopf ersetzen. 

Man sah dem Jüngling an, daß er einen heftigen Kampf mit sich
kämpfte. Sein Gesicht war bleich, sein Auge starr, seine Lippen fest
zusammengeklemmt. Die Warnung Mariens war ihm jetzt auf einmal klar;
aber wie fest er auch bei sich beschloß, den Antrag auszuschlagen, wie
erwünscht beinahe diese Gelegenheit erschien, um dem Bunde zu entsagen,
so kam ihm die Entscheidung doch zu überraschend, er scheute sich, vor
den berühmten Männern seinen Entschluß auszusprechen.

Der Truchseß rückte ungeduldig auf seinem Stuhl hin und her, als der
junge Mann so lange mit seiner Antwort zögerte:  Nun, wird's bald?
Warum besinnet Ihr Euch so lange?  rief er ihm zu.

 Verschonet mich mit diesem Auftrag,  sagte Georg nicht ohne Zagen;
 ich kann, ich darf nicht. 

Die alten Männer sahen sich erstaunt an, als trauten sie ihren Ohren
nicht.  Ihr dürft nicht, Ihr könnt nicht?  wiederholte Truchseß
langsam, und eine dunkle Röte, der Vorbote seines aufsteigenden
Zornes, lagerte sich auf seine Stirne und um seine Augen.

Georg sah, daß er sich in seinen Ausdrücken übereilt habe; er sammelte
sich und sprach mit freierem Mute:  Ich habe Euch meine Dienste
angeboten, um ehrlich zu fechten, nicht aber, um mich in Feindesland zu
schleichen und hinterrücks nach seinen Gedanken zu spähen. Es ist wahr,
ich bin jung und unerfahren, aber so viel weiß ich doch, um mir von
meinen Schritten Rechenschaft geben zu können; und wer von Euch, der
Vater eines Sohnes ist, möchte ihm zu seiner ersten Waffentat raten,
den Kundschafter zu machen? 

Der Truchseß zog die dunkeln, buschigen Augenbrauen zusammen und schoß
einen durchdringenden Blick auf den Jüngling, der so kühn war, anderer
Meinung zu sein als er.  Was fällt Euch ein, Junker!  rief er.  Eure
Reden helfen Euch jetzt zu nichts, es handelt sich nicht darum, ob es
sich mit Eurem kindischen Gewissen verträgt, was wir Euch auftragen; es
handelt sich um Gehorsam, wir wollen es, und Ihr _müßt_! 

 Und ich _will_ nicht!  entgegnete ihm Georg mit fester Stimme. Er
fühlte, daß mit dem Zorn über Waldburgs beleidigenden Ton sein Mut von
Minute zu Minute wachse, er wünschte sogar, der Truchseß möchte noch
weiter in seinen Reden fortfahren, denn jetzt glaubte er sich jeder
Entscheidung gewachsen.

 Ja freilich, freilich!  lachte Waldburg in bitterem Grimm,  das Ding
hat Gefahr, so allein in Feindesland herumzureiten. Ha! Ha! Da kommen
die Junker von Habenichts und Binnichts und bieten mit großen Worten
und erhabenen Gesichtern ihren Kopf und ihren tapfern Arm an, und wenn
es drauf und dran kommt, wenn man etwas von ihnen haben will, so fehlt
es an Herz. Doch Art läßt nicht von Art, der Apfel fällt nicht weit vom
Stamme -- und wo nichts ist, da hat der Kaiser das Recht verloren. 

 Wenn dies eine Beleidigung für meinen Vater sein soll,  antwortete
Georg erbittert,  so sitzen hier Zeugen, die ihm bezeugen können,
daß er in ihrem Gedächtnisse als ein Tapferer lebt. Ihr müßt viel
getan haben in der Welt, daß Ihr Euch herausnehmt, auf andere so tief
herabzusehen! 

 Soll ein solcher Milchbart mir vorschreiben, was ich reden soll? 
unterbrach ihn Waldburg.  Was braucht es da das lange Schwatzen? Ich
will wissen, Junkerlein, ob Ihr morgen Euer Pferd satteln und Euch
nach unseren Befehlen richten wollt oder nicht! 

 Herr Truchseß,  antwortete Georg mit mehr Ruhe, als er sich selbst
zugetraut hatte,  Ihr habt durch Eure scharfen Reden nichts gezeigt,
als daß Ihr wenig wisset, wie man mit einem Edelmann, der dem Bunde
seine Dienste anbot, wie man mit dem Sohn meines tapfern Vaters reden
müsse. Ihr habt aber als Oberster dieses Rates im Namen des Bundes zu
mir gesprochen und mich so tief beleidigt, als ob ich Euer ärgster
Feind wäre, darum kann ich nichts tun als, wie Ihr selbst befehlet,
mein Roß satteln, aber gewiß nicht zu Eurem Dienst. Es ist mir nicht
länger Ehre, diesen Fahnen zu folgen, nein, ich sage mich los und ledig
von euch für immer; gehabt euch wohl! 

Der junge Mann hatte mit Nachdruck und Festigkeit gesprochen und wandte
sich, zu gehen.

 Georg,  rief Frondsberg, indem er aufsprang,  Sohn meines Freundes! -- 

 Nicht so rasch, Junker!  riefen die übrigen und warfen mißbilligende
Blicke auf Waldburg; aber Georg war, ohne sich umzusehen, aus dem
Gemach geschritten, die eiserne Klinke schlug klirrend ins Schloß, und
die gewaltigen Flügel der eichenen Pforte lagerten sich zwischen ihm
und dem wohlmeinenden Nachruf der besser gesinnten Männer; sie schieden
Georg von Sturmfeder auf ewig von dem schwäbischen Bunde.




10.

    O wenn die Nacht des Grames dich umschlinget,
    Mit schwerem Leid dein wundes Herz oft ringet,
    Wenn nur der Stern, der nach der Sonne stehet
    Der Liebe Stern in dir nicht untergehet.

            _P. Conz._


Georg fühlte sich leichter, als er auf seinem Zimmer über das
Vorgefallene nachdachte. Jetzt war ja entschieden, was zu _entscheiden_
er so lange gezögert hatte, entschieden auf eine Weise, wie er sie
besser nicht hätte wünschen können. So hatte er jetzt einen guten
Grund, das Heer sogleich zu verlassen, und der Oberst-Feldleutnant
mußte die Schuld sich selbst beimessen.

Wie schnell hatte sich doch alles in den vier Tagen gewendet; wie
verschieden waren die Gesinnungen, mit denen er in diese Stadt einzog,
von denen, die ihn aus ihren Mauern hinaustrieben! Damals, als der
Donner der Geschütze, der feierliche Klang aller Glocken, die lockenden
Töne der Trompeten ihn begrüßten, wie schlug da sein Herz dem Kampf
entgegen, um Marien zu verdienen! Und als er das erste Mal vor jenen
Frondsberg geführt wurde, wie erhebend war der Gedanke, unter den Augen
dieses Mannes zu streiten, aus seinem Munde sich Ruhm zu erwerben! --
Und wie erkaltete bald darauf sein Eifer, als der Bund in seinen Augen
jenen Glanz verlor, mit welchem ihn seine jugendliche Phantasie umgeben
hatte; wie schämte er sich, sein Schwert für die zu ziehen, die, nur
von Eigennutz und Habgier getrieben, das schöne Land sich zur Beute
ausersehen hatten! Wie schrecklich der Gedanke, Marie und die Ihrigen
auf der feindlichen Seite zu wissen, treuergeben dem unglücklichen
Fürsten, den auch er aus seinen Grenzen jagen helfen sollte? Um eine
solche Sache sollte er jenes teure Herz brechen, das unter jedem
Wechsel treu für ihn schlug?  Nein! Du hast es wohl mit mir gemeint, 
sprach er, indem sein Auge dem Strahl der Abendsonne, der durch die
runden Scheiben hereinfiel, hinauf zu dem blauen Himmel folgte;  du
hast es wohl mit mir gemeint; was jedem andern, der heute an meiner
Stelle stand, zum Verderben gewesen wäre, hast du für mich zum Heil
gelenkt!  Jene Heiterkeit, die, seit er wußte, wie furchtbar sich das
Geschick zwischen ihn und die Geliebte stellte, einem trüben Ernst
gewichen war, kehrte wieder auf seine Stirne, um seinen Mund zurück; er
sang sich ein frohes Lied, wie in seinen _frohesten_ Augenblicken. --

Erstaunt betrachtete ihn der eintretende Herr von Kraft.  Nun, das
ist doch sonderbar,  sagte er;  ich eile nach Haus, um meinen Gast in
seinem gerechten Schmerz zu trösten, und finde ihn so fröhlich wie nie;
wie reime ich das zusammen? 

 Habt Ihr noch nie gehört, Herr Dietrich,  entgegnete Georg, der für
geratener hielt, seine Fröhlichkeit zu verbergen,  habt Ihr nie gehört,
daß man auch aus Zorn lachen und im Schmerz singen kann? 

 Gehört hab' ich es schon, aber gesehen nie bis zu diesem Augenblick, 
antwortete Kraft.

 Nun, und Ihr habt also auch von der verdrießlichen Geschichte gehört? 
fragte Georg.  Man erzählt es sich gewiß schon auf allen Straßen? 

 O nein,  antwortete der Ratsschreiber,  man weiß nirgends etwas davon,
man hätte ja zugleich Eure geheime Sendung nach Württemberg damit
ausposaunen müssen. Nein! Ich habe, Gott sei Dank, so meine eigenen
Quellen und erfahre manches noch in _der_ Stunde, wo es getan oder
gesprochen wurde. Aber nehmt mir's nicht übel, Ihr habt da einen dummen
Streich gemacht! 

 So,  antwortete Georg lächelnd,  und warum denn? 

 Bot sich Euch nicht die schönste Gelegenheit, Euch auszuzeichnen? Wem
wären die Bundesobersten mehr Dank schuldig als -- 

 Sagt es nur heraus,  unterbrach ihn Georg,  als dem Kundschafter in
des Feindes Rücken. Es ist nur schade, daß mein Vater und die Ehre
meines Namens mich _vor_, und nicht _hinter_ den Feind bestimmt haben,
es sei denn, daß er vor mir fliehe. 

 Dies sind Bedenklichkeiten, die ich nicht bei Euch gesucht hätte.
Wahrlich, wenn ich so bekannt in jener Gegend wäre wie Ihr, man hätte
es mir nicht zweimal sagen dürfen. 

 Ihr habt hier zu Lande vielleicht andere Grundsätze über diesen
Punkt,  sagte Georg, nicht ohne Spott,  als wir in unserem Franken, das
hätte Truchseß von Waldburg bedenken und einen Ulmer schicken sollen. 

 Ihr bringt mich da eben recht noch auf etwas anderes. Der
Oberst-Feldleutnant! Wie habt Ihr ihn Euch so zum Feinde machen mögen?
Denn daß dieser Euch das Geschehene in seinem Leben nicht verzeiht,
dürft Ihr gewiß sein. 

 Das ist mein geringster Kummer,  antwortete Georg,  aber eines tut mir
weh, daß ich den Uebermütigen, der schon meinem Vater Böses getan, wo
er konnte, nicht vor meine Klinge stellen und ihm zeigen kann, daß der
Arm nicht so ganz zu verachten ist, den er heute von sich gestoßen hat. 

 Um Gottes willen,  fiel Kraft ein,  sprecht nicht so laut, er könnte
es hören. Ueberhaupt müßt Ihr Euch sehr zusammennehmen, wenn Ihr ferner
im Heere unter ihm dienen wollt. 

 Ich will den Herrn Truchseß von meinem verhaßten Anblick bald
befreien. So Gott will, habe ich die Sonne zum letztenmal in Ulm
untergehen sehen! 

 So wäre es wahr,  fragte Herr von Kraft mit Staunen,  was man noch
dazusetzte, und was ich nicht glauben konnte: Georg von Sturmfeder will
wegen dieser Kleinigkeit unsere gute Sache verlassen? 

 Verletzung der Ehre ist nirgends eine Kleinigkeit,  antwortete Georg
ernst,  am wenigsten bei einem Stand wie der unsrige. Was aber Eure
gute Sache betrifft, so habe ich nachgerade eingesehen, daß ich weder
für eine gute Sache, noch für eine gute Meinung, sondern für ein paar
große Herren und für ein paar Mauern voll Spießbürger mich schlagen
sollte. 

Der unangenehme Eindruck, den besonders die letzten Worte auf den
Ratsschreiber machten, entging ihm nicht, er fuhr daher, indem er seine
Hand ergriff und drückte, ruhiger fort:  Nehmet mir meine scharfen
Worte nicht übel, mein freundlicher Wirt, weiß Gott, ich habe Euch
nicht damit beleidigen wollen; aber aus Eurem eigenen Munde habe ich
die Gesinnungen und Zwecke der verschiedenen Parteien in diesem Heere
erfahren. Schreibt es Euch selbst zu, wenn ich meinen eigenen Weg
einschlage, da _Ihr_ mir die Binde von den Augen genommen habt. 

 Ihr habt so unrecht gerade nicht, guter Junker, es wird bunt hergehen,
wenn die Herren erst das schöne Land da drüben unter sich teilen; aber
da habe ich gedacht, es geht ja in einem hin, Ihr könntet Euch auch
Euer Scherflein dabei verdienen. Man sagt, Ihr dürft es mir aber nicht
übelnehmen, Euer Haus sei etwas herabgekommen, da meinte ich -- 

 Nichts davon!  fiel Georg rasch ein, gerührt von der Gutmütigkeit
seines Gastfreundes.  Das Haus meiner Väter zerfällt, unsere Tore
hängen auf gebrochenen Angeln, auf der Zugbrücke wächst Moos, und auf
dem hohen Wartturm hausen Eulen. In fünfzig Jahren steht vielleicht
noch ein Turm oder ein Mäuerchen und erinnert den Wanderer, daß hier
einst ein ritterliches Geschlecht hauste. Aber wenn auch die morschen
Mauern über mir zusammenstürzen und den Letzten meines Stammes unter
ihren Trümmern begraben, niemand soll von mir sagen, ich habe für
ungerechtes Gut das Schwert meines Vaters gezogen. 

 Jeder nach seiner Weise,  antwortete Dietrich,  es klingt dies alles
recht schön; aber ich für meinen Teil würde mir schon etwas gefallen
lassen, um mein Haus anständig und wohnlich wiederherzustellen. --
Möget Ihr übrigens Euren Entschluß ändern oder nicht, auf jeden Fall
hoffe ich, werdet Ihr es Euch noch einige Tage bei mir gefallen lassen. 

 Ich erkenne Eure Güte,  antwortete Georg;  aber Ihr seht, daß ich
unter den gegenwärtigen Umständen nichts mehr in dieser Stadt zu tun
habe. Ich gedenke mit Anbruch des Morgens zu reiten. 

 Nun, und kann man Euch Grüße mitgeben?  sagte der Ratsschreiber mit
überaus schlauem Lächeln.  Ihr reitet doch den nächsten Weg nach
Lichtenstein? 

Der junge Mann errötete bis in die Stirne hinauf. Es war zwischen ihm
und seinem Gastfreund seit Mariens Abreise dieser Gegenstand noch nicht
zur Sprache gekommen; um so mehr überraschte ihn jetzt die schlaue
Frage seines Gastfreundes.  Ich sehe,  sagte er,  daß Ihr mich noch
immer falsch verstehet. Ihr glaubet, ich habe dem Bunde nur deswegen
den Rücken zugewandt, um mich an die Feinde anzuschließen? Wie möget
Ihr nur so schlimm von mir denken! 

 Ach, geht mir doch!  entgegnete der kluge Ratsschreiber.  Niemand
anders als mein reizendes Bäschen hat Euch von uns abwendig gemacht.
Ihr hättet wohl zu allem, was der Bund getan, ein Auge zugedrückt, wenn
der alte Lichtenstein auch mitgemacht hätte; nun er auf der andern
Seite steht, glaubt Ihr auch schnell umsatteln zu müssen! 

Georg mochte sich verteidigen, wie er wollte, der Ratsschreiber war
zu fest von seiner eigenen Klugheit überzeugt, als daß er sich diese
Meinung hätte ausreden lassen. Er fand diesen Schritt auch ganz
natürlich und sah nichts Böses oder Unehrliches darin. Mit einem
herzlichen Gruß an die Base in Lichtenstein verließ er das Zimmer
seines Gastes. Doch auf der Schwelle wandte er sich noch einmal um.
 Fast hätte ich das Wichtigste vergessen,  sagte er,  ich begegnete
Georg von Frondsberg auf der Straße. Er läßt Euch bitten, heute abend
noch zu ihm in sein Haus zu kommen. 

Georg hatte sich zwar selbst vorgestellt, daß ihn Frondsberg nicht ohne
Abschied werde ziehen lassen, und doch war ihm bange vor dem Anblick
dieses Mannes, der es so gut mit ihm gemeint, und dessen freundliche
Pläne er so schnell durchkreuzt hatte. Er schnallte unter den Gedanken
an diesen schweren Gang sein Schwert um und wollte eben seinen Mantel
zurechtlegen, als ein sonderbares Geräusch von der Treppe her seine
Aufmerksamkeit auf sich zog. Schwere Tritte vieler Menschen näherten
sich seiner Türe, er glaubte Schwerter und Hellebarden auf dem Estrich
seines Vorsaales klirren zu hören. Er machte schnell einige Schritte
gegen die Türe, um sich von dem Grund seiner Vermutung zu überzeugen.

Aber noch ehe er die Türe erreicht hatte, ging diese auf. Das matte
Licht einiger Kerzen ließ ihn mehrere bewaffnete Kriegsknechte sehen,
die seine Türe umstellt hatten. Jener alte Kriegsmann, der ihn heute
vor dem Kriegsrat empfangen hatte, trat aus ihrer Mitte hervor.

 Georg von Sturmfeder!  sprach er zu dem Jüngling, der mit Staunen
zurücktrat,  ich nehme Euch auf Befehl eines hohen Bundesrats gefangen. 

 Mich, gefangen?  rief Georg mit Schrecken.  Warum? Wessen beschuldigt
man mich denn? 

 Das ist nicht meine Sache,  antwortete der Alte mürrisch,  doch wird
man Euch vermutlich nicht lange in Ungewißheit lassen. Jetzt aber seid
so gut und reicht mir Euer Schwert und folget mir auf das Rathaus. 

Wie? Euch soll ich mein Schwert geben?  entgegnete der junge Mann mit
dem Zorn beleidigten Stolzes.  Wer seid Ihr, daß Ihr mir meine Waffen
abfordern könnet? Da muß der Rat ganz andere Leute schicken als Euch,
so viel verstehe ich auch von Eurem Handwerk! 

 Um Gottes willen, gebt doch nach,  rief der Ratsschreiber, der
sich bleich und verstört an seine Seite gedrängt hatte,  gebt nach!
Widerstand kann Euch wenig nützen. Ihr habt es mit dem Truchseß zu
tun,  flüsterte er heimlicher;  das ist ein böser Feind, bringt ihn
nicht noch ärger gegen Euch auf. 

Der alte Kriegsmann unterbrach die Einflüsterungen des Ratsschreibers.
 Es ist wahrscheinlich das erste Mal, Junker,  sagte er,  daß Ihr in
Haft genommen werdet, deswegen verzeihe ich Euch gern die unziemlichen
Worte gegen einen Mann, der oft in einem Zelt mit Eurem Vater schlief.
Euer Schwert möget Ihr auch immerhin behalten. Ich kenne diesen Griff
und diese Scheide und habe den Stahl, den sie verschließt, manchen
rühmlichen Kampf ausfechten sehen. Es ist löblich, daß Ihr viel darauf
haltet und es nicht in jede Hand kommen lassen möget; aber aufs Rathaus
müßt Ihr mit, denn es wäre töricht, wenn Ihr der Gewalt Trotz bieten
wolltet.

Procreate 5, Savage Interactive’s newest update for the iOS painting and illustration app, is now available. The free update brings long-awaited features such as Photoshop (ABR) brush import, custom brush creation, CMYK mode, and more robust animation features.
The app runs on a new Valkyrie graphics engine that works with Apple’s Metal API for faster performance on the iPad. With Valkyrie, Savage Interactive says the imported ABR brushes paint faster in Procreate 5 than in Photoshop. That’s something that’s going to make a difference for artists when they’re choosing which drawing app to use on the iPad, especially on the heels of Adobe’s Photoshop for the iPad, which received disappointing reviews when it was released last month. Photoshop for the iPad doesn’t actually support brush importing yet. (Fresco, Adobe’s illustration-focused app, does.) So the fact that Procreate now supports Photoshop brushes is a big deal
It’s the Valkyrie engine that also powers the new Brush studio feature, which lets artists combine two brushes to create a custom one. Users can continue to tweak settings and control how the brushes will look and behave.
Pocreate 5 adds a host of new color features. Color Dynamics lets artists control settings like hue, saturation, and brightness through the Apple Pencil’s tilt and pressure. And Color Harmony automatically selects complementary, split-complementary, analogous, triadic, and tetradic colors based on the color you’ve chosen. CMYK mode is another welcome addition to Procreate, which will give artists the flexibility to work with print files, like comic book pages.
Animation Assist is a new tool that adds a timeline to the app for looping GIFs and animated videos. Procreate added animation features back in April, but Animation Assist adds features like onion skinning (including the ability to tweak how many frames you can see at once and control their opacity) and set frames per second. There’s also an instant playback feature, which is a huge improvement over the old method, which required users to export layers to see the final animation.
There are more additions in this update, like a clone tool, a detachable color panel, and small UI improvements as well. But Photoshop brush support and Animation Assist are the big key features that show how Savage listens to its users and the reason why Procreate remains the best illustration app on the iPad.
Procreate is available on the App Store for $10, and the update is free for all users.
Procreate 5, Savage Interactive’s newest update for the iOS painting and illustration app, is now available. The free update brings long-awaited features such as Photoshop (ABR) brush import, custom brush creation, CMYK mode, and more robust animation features.
The app runs on a new Valkyrie graphics engine that works with Apple’s Metal API for faster performance on the iPad. With Valkyrie, Savage Interactive says the imported ABR brushes paint faster in Procreate 5 than in Photoshop. That’s something that’s going to make a difference for artists when they’re choosing which drawing app to use on the iPad, especially on the heels of Adobe’s Photoshop for the iPad, which received disappointing reviews when it was released last month. Photoshop for the iPad doesn’t actually support brush importing yet. (Fresco, Adobe’s illustration-focused app, does.) So the fact that Procreate now supports Photoshop brushes is a big deal.
Brush Studio. Image: Savage Interactive
It’s the Valkyrie engine that also powers the new Brush studio feature, which lets artists combine two brushes to create a custom one. Users can continue to tweak settings and control how the brushes will look and behave.
Procreate 5 adds a host of new color features. Color Dynamics lets artists control settings like hue, saturation, and brightness through the Apple Pencil’s tilt and pressure. And Color Harmony automatically selects complementary, split-complementary, analogous, triadic, and tetradic colors based on the color you’ve chosen. CMYK mode is another welcome addition to Procreate, which will give artists the flexibility to work with print files, like comic book pages.
Color Dynamics. Image: Savage Interactive
Animation Assist is a new tool that adds a timeline to the app for looping GIFs and animated videos. Procreate added animation features back in April, but Animation Assist adds features like onion skinning (including the ability to tweak how many frames you can see at once and control their opacity) and set frames per second. There’s also an instant playback feature, which is a huge improvement over the old method, which required users to export layers to see the final animation.
There are more additions in this update, like a clone tool, a detachable color panel, and small UI improvements as well. But Photoshop brush support and Animation Assist are the big key features that show how Savage listens to its users and the reason why Procreate remains the best illustration app on the iPad.
Procreate is available on the App Store for $10, and the update is free for all users
The NFL is hoping big data tools can help bring down the number of concussions, ligament tears, and other injuries sustained in each game of professional football. Currently, the injury count per game is holding steady at an average of six or seven. League engineers are working with Amazon Web Services to apply machine learning and artificial intelligence tools to player data, with the hope of finding in-game situations that commonly lead to injury, The Wall Street Journal reported this week.

“Ultimately, we will be able to identify injury risk scenarios, and we will be able to predict injury risk scenarios, and we will be able to find innovations that will make the game safer for our athletes while maintaining high quality of play,” Jeff Crandall, chair of the NFL’s engineering committee, said during the program announcement.
The NFL and Amazon have vast resources at their disposal. But injuries, especially in chaotic sports like football, are incredibly hard to predict. “It’s the holy grail. Everyone wants to do it, and no one can,” says Zachary Binney, an epidemiologist and consultant who has worked with Major League Baseball and college sports teams on injury prevention. “I’m skeptical until I see results.”
Predicting injuries is challenging because there are so many factors that could contribute to a possible injury, from an athletes physical characteristics on a particular day to slight divots on a field. One athlete might have five attributes that research shows puts them at risk for an injury and still not get hurt, but another might look perfectly fine and tear a ligament the next day. “It is just an incredibly difficult problem,” Binney says.
The Amazon Web Services partnership will try to close the gap with league-level data from the NFL’s Next Gen Stats, which capture location data, speed, and acceleration for every player on the field hundreds of times a minute through microchips in their pads. It also includes video footage of games, information on playing surface and environmental factors, and anonymized player injury data, according to the NFL. It doesn’t collect data on how hard body parts are hitting the ground or other players, which is one limitation, Binney says. But it can see, with granular detail, how and at what speed a player ran a play, changed direction, or made a tackle. The goal is to find out if any common elements of football are more likely than others to lead to any injury.
“You could look at what happens when a wide receiver moving this quickly makes this sharp turn, and might be able to tease something out,” Binney says.
The league-level data only includes some measures of player activity. Individual teams have more granular level data on their players, typically tracking things like heart rate, fatigue, hydration, and other measures — all of which can contribute to injury risk for a particular player. Other risk factors for injuries in football include flexibility, injury history, strength, and body composition. However, much of the player-specific data stays at the team level, to avoid giving their opponents potentially useful information about how their players are doing.
Player health data will not be included in the injury prediction program, according to an email from an NFL spokesperson to The Verge. That might affect its predictive power. “It will be really interesting to see. I don’t know what impact that might have, and I can’t imagine that they do yet either,” Binney says.
Even without the more granular information, the league has data on the athletes from all 32 teams, which gives them more to work with. “You’re losing some of the resolution on the data, but increasing the sample size,” Binney says.
In the past, employees at the NFL have manually gone over hundreds of hours of game footage and helmet impacts to identify situations that lead to injury, and made changes — like updates to the kickoff rules — with the goal of preventing them. Binney speculates that the project could lead to additional changes, but that any information they’re able to gather could have additional value beyond that. “One thing they could do is put the information out there and tell coaches that when they ask a lineman to do some kind of block, or route, it creates the sorts of changes in direction or deceleration when we see bad things happen,” he says. It’s in the best interest of coaches, after all, to keep players healthy, and there could be alternatives to riskier plays.

If the NFL’s efforts into injury prediction and prevention prove effective, they might offer a road map to other sports, as well. Binney says it’s a positive step. “I’m excited to see it happen, even though I’m cautious about how much we might be able to draw from it.
PlayStation 4 is designed to feel impenetrable. The machine — jet black, almost brutalist in shape — conceals its function to the untrained eye. Power on and disk eject buttons, as well as the actual disk drive, are almost invisible. It’s as if Sony hopes to imbue the object with a sense of mystery and awe. The PlayStation 2 played with similar emotions at the turn of the millennium, sitting bolt upright like the Monolith in 2001: A Space Odyssey. But the most recent PlayStation looks more like the headquarters of a galactic government. Its secrets, though, couldn’t be more terrestrial, originating deep within Earth’s crust and at the hands of workers across the globe. Far from being detached from the environment, the PlayStation 4 is an object hewn from its materials and inhabitants.
As the climate crisis chastens and public awareness grows, environmental concerns have finally made their way to the video game industry. Sony recently signed up to the United Nations-backed initiative Playing for the Planet, while it’s broader “Road to Zero” initiative aims to “achieve a zero environmental footprint by the year 2050,” including goals to curb climate change, conserve resources, and promote biodiversity. But precisely how this squares with the company’s ongoing aim to sell hardware with short-term lives (the PlayStation 5 releases next year, effectively making its predecessor obsolete) remains to be seen.
In an effort to explore both the environmental and human impacts of Sony’s current video game console, I decided to take one apart. Under its plastic hood, I discovered a machine that spans continents and deep time, touches thousands of lives (for better and worse), and leaves an indelible, measurable stain on Earth and its atmosphere.

On October 29th, 2019, the University of Cambridge welcomed me into its engineering department’s vast, utilitarian building, which is noticeably less sacral-looking than the institution’s other more famous sites. I met with Claire Barlow, a specialist in sustainability, materials, and figuring out what happens to leviathan wind turbine blades at the end of their lives. She whisked me through the building’s labyrinth-like corridors, past students in lectures and researchers with goggles, to a subterranean lab decorated with innumerable hazard signs. Exposed pipes crisscrossed the walls while strange machines whirred in the background. Just behind us, a giant industrial magnet powered up with warning signs dotted about its perimeter so we wouldn’t scramble our phones. Before long, John Durrell, a specialist in superconductor engineering (who took apart more machines as a teenager than he can remember), arrived with a set of tools in his hands and a glint in his eye.
We unpacked the machine first. An outer box that beamed with flashy images, marketing copy, and densely packed small print took a fiddly few moments to remove. This external layer of card is heavily processed, which means it has a high carbon and environmental footprint, but it’s still recyclable, Barlow told me. Next came more cardboard — probably protective, less processed — before we got to the molded card holding the PS4 firmly in place. All of these materials should find another life as recycled cardboard, provided they’re processed correctly.
We moved on to the console itself, and Durrell popped its top lid off with ease. This piece of plastic — black, ever so slightly dappled, with a glossy PlayStation logo positioned prominently in its center — is made from acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS), which is the same cheap, hard-wearing material from which Lego blocks are made. An origin is engraved into the plastic: the Casetek Computer factory in Suzhou, a city with over 10 million inhabitants, which is referred to as the “Venice of China.” Because the ABS is labeled (along with most of the other materials within the console), it means it has a better-than-normal chance of being recycled, which falls in line with Sony’s recycling policy. Another company initiative aims to reduce virgin plastic in its products by 10 percent in 2020. But in 2018, virgin plastic used per product was actually up 2.4 percent from its 2013 figure.

Let’s hypothesize that the 511 grams of ABS spread throughout the machine are actually virgin plastic. How might it have been produced? This is where things get trippy. Like almost every form of plastic on the planet, ABS is made from petrochemicals that are derived from petroleum, the fossil fuel we commonly refer to as crude oil. The substance materialized over millions of years as fossilized organisms like zooplankton and algae were covered by stagnant water and further layers of these dead animals and plants. Try to imagine not only how slow that process is (geologists call this “deep time”) but also the near-instantaneous speed at which the oil was extracted from the earth. Now consider its carbon residue just sitting in the atmosphere, slowly helping make the planet hotter. As I stared at the plastic, these head-spinning thoughts flashed through my mind.
Sony’s ABS, which pumps approximately 1.6 kilograms of carbon dioxide equivalent into the atmosphere for every PlayStation 4 manufactured, might have originated from China as part of the country’s expanding petrochemicals industry. But huge reserves can also be found in Venezuela, Canada, and a host of Middle Eastern countries. Once the oil has actually been mined, a complex process involving transport, refinery, and the plastic manufacturing takes place. “It’s energy-intensive,” Barlow soberly told me in the lab, “from top to bottom.”
“IT’S ENERGY-INTENSIVE, FROM TOP TO BOTTOM.”
Deeper inside the PlayStation 4, we came across a lot of steel, approximately 736 grams. Around 70 to 90 percent of steel gets recycled internationally, during which old parts are melted down, refined, and turned into new steel. This is what Barlow describes as “genuine recycling.” But because steel demand continues to rise, which means creating the metal alloy from ore, the proportion of recycled material in new steel sits at around 35 percent. In China, where the PlayStation 4 is made, it’s even less, clocking in at 20 percent. Still, from Sony’s point of view, the metal is cheap and structurally stable.
The economic efficiency with which the PlayStation 4 has been designed and subsequently manufactured is one of the machine’s most striking elements. We peered into the complex cogs of the Blu-ray drive, which is mostly made from a plastic called polyoxymethylene (POM) and is cheaper than hardier nylon plastic. The heatsink is made from aluminum, most likely because it’s a more cost-effective material than copper. The plastic ABS casing would have been created using injection molding, a process that results in very little waste material. Again, it’s cheaper for Sony and a little bit better for the environment, albeit relatively so.
Low-cost thinking extends to the limited use of more expensive metals. Occasional pieces of gold materialize on the main circuit board where various components are held in place by a tin-based solder. When it comes to the open pit and hard rock mining, the extraction methods responsible for some of the world’s gold (as well as the copper and neodymium found in the machine), there’s the actual blowing up of the earth. But enormous quantities of water are also required for mineral processing, dust suppression, slurry pipelines (to transport minerals in remote areas), and, last but by no means least, employees’ needs. Another extraction process called cyanide leaching sprays the toxic chemical over mined ore to dissolve the gold, thereby making it easier to extract. This comes with its own ecological and health risks if the cyanide leaks into the local area. Each method is grim for the environment where metals are often scattered diffusely throughout the rock.
Gold and tin are classified as “conflict minerals” by US legislation, a term that refers to resources originating from Congo and its neighboring countries. This region has faced ongoing violence for the past 30 years, funded in part, and amid many other complex factors, by its colossal mineral wealth, which is estimated at $24 trillion. Since 2010, publicly listed US companies have been required to check their supply chains for such minerals, their origins, and any risks associated with their extraction. We can’t be sure whether any of the tin or gold in the PlayStation 4 originated from this African region because Sony doesn’t publish its supply chain — unlike, say, Apple — but there’s cause for concern.
Earlier this year, Gamesindustry.biz combed Sony’s corporate documents to reveal 53 smelters or refiners (the companies that process metals, sometimes at the site of extraction) failing to meet the standards set by the Responsible Minerals Assurance Process, including sourcing practices. It’s feasible that some of these 53 smelters or refiners exist within what’s called a “covered country” (e.g., Congo and its adjoining countries), which means their mines could be, too. Working conditions at such mines are often pitiful, sometimes involving violence and child labor, and all for mercilessly little pay. It’s quite possible that the tin-based solder in your PlayStation 4, which is the glue holding its vital computerized parts together, originated from such deep exploitation.
After a while, Durrell wrestled the AMD microchip, an integrated CPU and GPU, away from the circuit board using a heat gun and pair of pliers. This is the component that breathes Frankenstein-like life into the machine’s inanimate assembly of earthly materials. He held it up, and we all squinted at the flattened forest green square with plastic hairs fraying at its edges. “You miniaturize the product, and you maximize your carbon footprint,” Barlow said. “Even though it’s very little material, the processing energy is absolutely huge, and the end of life is almost impossible. It’s basically single-use.”
Under the microscope, I could see just how intricate the chip is, geometric lines multiplying in every direction like a Japanese cityscape. For a split-second, I was overwhelmed by its vastness, experiencing what some people might describe as “technological sublime.” It feels like vertigo. Away from the microscope and firmly back in the real world, I scheduled a call with California-based microchip expert Sarah Boyd.

The first point to bear in mind — because there are over 100 million PlayStation 4s out there, and AMD also produces chips like this for Microsoft’s own Xbox One console — is the scale at which these tiny objects are being produced. Such immense numbers become even more mind-boggling when you consider not only the intricacy of the actual manufacturing process but the conditions under which these microchips are made. Boyd told me it takes approximately 400 process steps to create chips like this in sparkling clean rooms inhabited by humans wearing iconic bunny suits and futuristic-looking robots.
Why do microchips demand such pristine manufacturing conditions? It’s essentially so that no unwanted particles find their way into the microscopic components. Boyd described Inception-like layers of rooms in cavernous facilities, each more filtered than the last, until you reach a final chemically scrubbed clean room. Ultra-pure water, air, argon, and nitrogen are all ferried around arrays of tubes and pipes, which, at times, resemble the complexity of an actual organism. A clean room’s floor is often actually a grate, under which a “sub-fab” lies where some of these tubes lead to equipment that sucks in lots of nasty chemicals and transforms them into less nasty chemicals. Such intensive air filtration and purifying procedures require almost cataclysmic amounts of electricity, which comes with its own carbon cost.
There is a darker, more direct way in which microchip manufacturing impacts humans and the climate, Boyd explained. Perfluorocarbons, potent greenhouse gases, are key to the manufacturing process. Inside the clean room equipment, high-energy plasma is used to break these perfluorocarbon gases apart, which subsequently releases highly corrosive fluorine. One example is nitrogen trifluoride, a greenhouse gas that is 16,100 times more powerful than carbon dioxide at trapping atmospheric heat. Needless to say, this spells bad news if the chemical does leak into Earth’s atmosphere. Worse yet is the effect such gases can have on the immediate surroundings if, for any reason, disposal systems within the manufacturing facility don’t function correctly.
Boyd described one incident in Asia where highly toxic fluorines escaped into the factory parking lot, and layers of employees’ windscreens started to literally disappear. “You can’t even imagine what’s happening to the people exposed to it directly in the air outside,” she said.
A different kind of terror lurks in the Chinese factories that actually assemble these machines. On the back of the PlayStation 4 we deconstructed in Cambridge, it simply read: “Made in China.” But other machines carry different text. At home, my console states: “Made in China MTK.” When I asked a friend to look at his PS4, he sent a grainy photo showing the text “Made in China FOX.”
MTK and FOX refer to two giant contract manufacturers, Maintek and Foxconn. Remember the top lid that Durrell popped off so easily? That was made by Casetek, which, alongside Maintek, is part of Pegatron, a giant corporation that creates consumer electronics, including the iPhone. You can find Maintek’s factory at the same address as Casetek in Suzhou, China. No. 233, Jinfeng Road is a monumental site employing up to 80,000 workers in peak season. In 2014, Students and Scholars Against Corporate Misbehaviour, a non-government organization based in Hong Kong, detailed abhorrent conditions there, including punishing work spells that can last for 10 weeks at a time, illegal charges for health checks, little protective equipment, and excessive performance-related fines.
“THIS REALLY AFFECTS THE WORKERS AS WELL.”
Conditions are just as bad for workers at Foxconn, which, over the past decade, has found itself at the heart of a string of scandals. In 2010, 15 people committed suicide at the so-called “Foxconn City” in Shenzhen, while poor conditions and unpaid student labor have all made headlines. In September 2019, China Labor Watch, another non-governmental organization, reported ongoing worker rights violations at Foxconn. On a phone call, I asked Child Labor Watch program officer Elaine Lu how she would characterize these working conditions.
“They’re pretty terrible and dire,” she said. “If you think about it, just for a worker to be on a production line doing the same thing is very monotonous work, with at least a hundred overtime hours a month. And then most of them live in dorms so their life is very centered around work and the facility itself. Not having the proper protections, not living in great conditions, this really affects the workers as well.”
A few days later, Barlow emailed me the results of her and Durrell’s findings. The equivalent of 89 kilograms of carbon dioxide is emitted into the atmosphere with the production and transportation of every PlayStation 4. I asked her if that was broadly in line with what she was expecting. “Yes,” she said simply. Certainly, the figure compares with other consumer electronic devices of its size and complexity, like a laptop. What if we multiply that number by 100 million, the number of consoles Sony has sold to date, would that be fair? “Yep,” she said again. Now we arrive at a more imposing number, one that feels like it captures the machine’s multitudes: the extraction and production of its raw materials, the global transportation of components, and the gigantic factories it’s assembled within. Since the PlayStation 4’s release in 2013, approximately 8.9 billion kilograms of carbon dioxide have been generated and subsequently released into the atmosphere. That’s more than all of Jamaica’s emissions in 2017. All for one little video game console.
What the figure doesn’t include is the energy consumed during the console’s use, so I purchased a plug-in energy monitor to test my own PlayStation 4. Over the course of an hour, Hideo Kojima’s new hiking simulator Death Stranding ate up 75 watts of electricity. If we estimate that average usage equates to roughly one hour each day, then a single player might generate 13.7 kilograms worth of carbon emissions throughout the year. If the player has owned their PlayStation 4 for the whole six years of its life to date, that’s 82.2 kilograms of carbon emissions, which is not far off the carbon footprint of the machine itself. Of course, if your electricity supplier is using a renewable energy source, then this point is null and void. But for the majority of us, our electricity will come from natural gas. (Only 17 percent of US electricity was renewably sourced in 2018.)
The PlayStation 4’s 8.9 billion kilogram carbon footprint leaves out other environmental impacts like pollutants that don’t end up in our carbon-soaked atmosphere. Take the controller’s lithium-ion battery, the same kind of chargeable technology powering electric cars. Lithium is produced by drilling holes into salt flats — usually found in massive crater-like lakes — and pumping brine to the surface. The important bit, lithium carbonate, is subsequently extracted through a chemical process. In recent years, pollution from the extraction process has led to the death of animals and crops, severely impacting local communities in countries like Argentina and China. The lithium that makes our controllers wireless is just another material that scars not only the landscape but the lives of those who call it home.
THE NUMBERS QUICKLY RACK UP TO AN ALMOST DIZZYING DEGREE
However forcefully Sony makes the case, the PlayStation 4 is not special. As Durrell said, the console is an “elegant piece of equipment,” but it’s also “much of a muchness” with other consumer electronics. When I asked Barlow how she might characterize the carbon footprint of consumer electronics, she offered just one word: “big.” Consider all of the other devices in the world, each with broadly similar carbon footprints using the same compressed carbon and shards of minerals formed over many millions of years. Workers might have been paid a pittance to extract, manufacture, and assemble those machines, too, with comparable industrial processes similarly impacting local environments. The numbers quickly rack up to an almost dizzying degree.
What was also remarkable about deconstructing the console was how quickly it transformed from a single object into an assembly of diffuse materials, each with their own histories, protagonists, and processes. As I think back to the cadaverous heap of metal, plastic, and electronics on the lab table in Cambridge University, it occurs to me that the PlayStation 4 has the most dazzling and problematic parts of global capitalism purring in unison. It is an exquisite, leanly designed machine pulsing with the exploitation of Earth and its people. I think lots of us know this, at least on some level, but our collective thirst for these carbon-hungry technologies remains unquenchable. Whether the planet can sustain such consumption is one question, but the ongoing human cost is another one entirely. For now, that’s the reality we must confront each time we boot up the jet black machine and plug ourselves back into the matrix

As Cyber Week draws to a close, and retailers begin their sales leading up to the holidays, deals are coming and going quickly. In this transition between sales season, we’ve picked out a few worthwhile deals, and we’ll be updating our coverage to bring you more as the next season of deals kicks off. And some of these deals are even better than the Black Friday and Cyber Monday savings.
Only the best deals on Verge-approved gadgets get the Good Deals stamp of approval, so if you're looking for a deal on your next gadget or gift from major retailers like Amazon, Walmart, Best Buy, Target, and more, this is the place to be.

Vox Media has affiliate partnerships. These do not influence editorial content, though Vox Media may earn commissions for products purchased via affiliate links. For more information, see our ethics policy.
Best Buy is offering sizable discounts on the 11-inch models of the latest iPad Pro. The savings range from $150 to $200 and each purchase comes with a free year of Apple TV Plus. We didn’t see any major deals on any iPad Pros over Black Friday and Cyber Monday, but we have seen these savings before. Here are the current price options:
Sling is offering a Google Nest Hub for free when you prepay for three months of Sling TV, which is convenient because not only do you get a streaming service, you also get a device to watch it on. This means you get the three-month subscription and the Nest Hub for a total of $75 — that’s slightly cheaper than what the Nest Hub alone cost over Black Friday and Cyber Monday
Dell still has Cyber Monday prices on popular XPS laptops. XPS 13 (13.3-inch, 8th Gen Intel Core i7 Processor, 256GB SSD, 8GB of RAM) is $250 off, for a price of $1,049.99. This is the same price we saw from other retailers during Black Friday. If you want it in white, it costs an additional $50.

You can also save on XPS 15 laptops. The 256GB SSD version with 16GB of RAM is $250 off for a total of $1,649.99. For more storage space, you can get the 1TB SSD version with 32GB of RAM discounted to $1,899.99, which will save you $450.
The 2-in-1s are on sale at Dell as well. The XPS 13 2-in-1 is $150 off, bringing the price down to $1,399.99, which is cheaper than it was during Black Friday. Both 2-in-1 versions (8GB and 16GB) of the XPS 15 are $310 off, for a price of $1,399.99 and $1,499.99, respectively.
And the Nintendo Switch Lite is $10 off (Amazon Prime members save an additional $10 off) on Woot, bringing the price down to $189.99 ($179.99 for Prime members). This is the best discount we’ve seen yet — there also weren’t any deals for this during Black Friday and Cyber Monday. It could sell out soon, so you may want to act fast in order to take advantage of this dea

It’s Cyber Monday, which means everyone is sorting through deals for all kinds of electronics. The number of sales may be overwhelming, which is why we’ve picked the best deal on a tablet: the seventh-generation iPad.
Both versions of the latest iPad are up to $100 off today. This is an unusually large discount for such a new product, and the price will almost certainly go back up after Cyber Monday, so this is a really good chance to save on an iPad.
The 32GB (Wi-Fi) version is selling for $229.99 at Target. Amazon is offering it in gray for $249, and Walmart has a limited stock of this tablet in gray for the same price. If you want more color choices, you can get it in gray, gold, or silver for $249.99 at Best Buy.
If you’re looking for more storage, the 128GB (Wi-Fi) version is $329.99 (which is also $100 off of the original price) at Best Buy and Target.

In his review, The Verge’s Dieter Bohn said that this iPad is an affordable alternative to the iPad Air and Pro, and that was before it went on sale. Plus, it has great battery life, a 10.2-inch screen, and a Smart Connector port so you can use the Smart Keyboard
Elon Musk’s tweets calling caver Vernon Unsworth, who was involved in the rescue of 13 people from a cave in Thailand, a “pedo guy” do not meet the legal standard for defamation, a jury found Friday afternoon. As a result, Musk will not be liable for damages.
The decision had to do with defamation law as the judge had laid it out. There were five points: first, that the statements had to be made to a person other than Unsworth; second, that the statements had to be understood to be about Unsworth; third, that the statements had to be understood to mean Unsworth was a pedophile; fourth, that the statements were false; and fifth, that the statements were reckless. “As soon as we got to point two, which was about being acquainted [with Unsworth], we decided,” Carl Shusterman, one of the eight members of the jury, told Buzzfeed News. “The people that read Musk’s tweet wouldn’t have known who he was talking about.”

Leaving the courtroom, Musk told reporters, “my faith in humanity is restored.” His attorney, Alex Spiro, said, “The jury did the right thing.”
Both Musk and Unsworth were present for the closing remarks. Musk appeared unhappy during the plaintiff’s closing remarks. Unsworth, whose back was to the jury, at times looked to be wiping tears from his eyes as Spiro spoke.

In closing remarks, Unsworth’s attorney, L. Lin Wood, characterized one of Musk’s tweets as “sue or true.” Wood said he believed Musk got involved in the Thai cave rescue as a publicity stunt. “I believe Elon Musk saw an opportunity to capitalize on the attention,” Wood said in his closing statement. Wood said that Musk’s tweets “dropped a bomb” on Unsworth, a nuclear bomb that would have radiation that might affect Unsworth for the rest of his life. Wood asked for $5 million in actual damages, $35 million in assumed damages and $150 million in punitive damages, which he characterized as a “hard slap on the wrist.”
In remarks to the press after the verdict, Wood said that the challenge from Musk was not to win the suit but merely to sue. “It’s not often that David beats Goliath,” Wood said outside the court building. Unsworth said he would “take it on the chin.”
With respect to Unsworth’s reputation, Wood said, “Anyone who knows Vernon Unsworth never believed the vile accusations of the billionaire bully.” The concern in the case was other people who might not know Unsworth — and potentially believe Musk, Wood said.
“IT’S NOT OFTEN THAT DAVID BEATS GOLIATH.”
Since Tuesday, the Los Angeles court has heard testimony from Unsworth, Musk, and others about the tweets. Musk has maintained that he viewed his tweets as insults, which are not defamation; on Tuesday, he testified that Twitter is “where people engage in verbal combat.” Unsworth said on Wednesday that he viewed the tweets as accusations, and he felt “dirtied” by them.

After a Thai soccer team and their coach were trapped in a cave system in July 2018, Unsworth — who had the best knowledge of the cave, rescuer Rick Stanton testified on Wednesday — assisted in rescue efforts. Musk had also built a “minisub,” which could be used as a plan B for rescuing the boys — in case the plan to drug the boys and swim them out using divers, which was ultimately successful, didn’t work out. In an interview with CNN, Unsworth said he viewed Musk’s involvement as a “PR stunt” with “absolutely no chance of working,” and that Musk could “stick his sub where it hurts.”
Musk watched the clip “two or three times,” he testified, before sending out the tweets in question. Musk testified that he didn’t know about Unsworth’s involvement in the rescue, assuming he was just some “ex-pat” living in Thailand. In his first tweet, he called Unsworth “sus.” In his last, he wrote “sorry pedo guy, you really did ask for it.” The tweets were “obviously a very off-the-cuff response,” and Musk deleted them and apologized for them.
Spiro reiterated in his closing remarks that the tweets were insults. Federal courts aren’t for people who insult each other, Spiro said. He also repeatedly asked about the whereabouts of Unsworth’s companion, a woman named Tik, who could have spoken to Unsworth’s emotional distress. Spiro also pointed out that Unsworth’s name did not appear in the tweets. “Who ever heard of an accusation of a crime against some dude?” he said. He characterized the exchange between Musk and Unsworth as an argument. “In arguments,” Spiro said, “you insult people.”

favorite gadgets ever, Nintendo’s Game Boy. This week was all about another favorite of mine: the PlayStation, which just turned 25. Although I actually never owned the original version of the console (shout out to my loving parents) I still remember childhood sleepovers spent sitting on the floor way too close to the TV, and the broken controllers and broken friendships that this thing caused.
For this issue, I wanted to take the same simple, but effective approach as we did for the Game Boy. That meant picking a nice color to compliment each console, and that can also fit nicely on our landing page where you can read the rest of the stories from this week’s issue. Oh, and also browsing eBay in order to find everything we needed for this. That involved finding multiple consoles, controllers, handhelds, and accessories, all spanning more than two decades of gaming history. Some of them were pretty dirty. And some never arrived on time. (Unfortunately, this means this photo history is slightly incomplete. I’m looking at you, PSP.)
But that didn’t feel like it was enough.
The next step was to create some additional element to the photos to make them pop just a bit more. And that’s where the patterned background comes into play. Now, I don’t want to spend too much time explaining what that background is — other than to say it plays an important role in PlayStation history. I’d love to see if any of our readers can identify what the pattern is actually made out of. Leave your guesses in the comments.
Black Friday is the best time of the year for the gaming fans who’ve felt like they didn’t have the budget or the time to pick up every new hit title on release day. I find myself in that category, as someone who played Insomniac’s excellent Spider-Man a year late (currently on Black Friday sale for $14.99 at Best Buy) and still has quite a few 2019 game of the year contenders sitting in my backlog.

Thankfully, this weekend is the time of the year when you can pull together between $50 and $100 and pick up a truly great collection of four or five games on the cheap.

RELATED

Here are the best gaming deals happening on Black Friday
While Black Friday is a great time to pick up old games for as little as the cost of a Fortnite battle pass (please play Bloodborne and God of War if you haven’t already, they’re currently $10 each), it’s also a good opportunity to pick up some of the year’s newest releases at a heavy discount. Sometimes, you can a find a game that is just a few months old for up to 50 percent off.

We’ve compiled a list of some of the year’s top reviewed titles that are on sale through the weekend for Black Friday, many of which just so happen to be on our own Best Games of 2019 list. You can’t go wrong with any of these purchases.

PLAYSTATION 4
Borderlands 3 is $30 $40 at Walmart
Call of Duty: Modern Warfare is $39.99 at Amazon, Best Buy, and Walmart
Control is $25 at Target
Devil May Cry 5 is $14.99 at Best Buy and 19.99 at Target and Walmart
Judgement is $24.99 at Amazon and Best Buy
Kingdom Hearts III is $14.99 at Best Buy, Target, and Walmart
Resident Evil 2 is $15 at Target or Best Buy (if you can find a copy, it’s mostly sold out)
Sekiro: Shadows Die Twice is $25 at Walmart
The Outer Worlds is $39.99 at Amazon or $35 at Target (in-store only now)
XBOX ONE
Bloodstained: Ritual of the Night is $19.99 on Amazon
Borderlands 3 is $30 $40 at Walmart
Call of Duty: Modern Warfare is $39.99 at Best Buy
Control is $25 at Target
Devil May Cry 5 is $14.99 at Amazon and Best Buy and $19.99 at Target and Walmart
Gears 5 is $24.99 at Amazon and Best Buy
Kingdom Hearts III is $14.99 at Best Buy, Target, and Walmart
Resident Evil 2 is $15 at Target or Best Buy (if you can find a copy, it’s mostly sold out)
Sekiro: Shadows Die Twice is $25 at Walmart
The Outer Wilds is $24.99 at Amazon
NINTENDO SWITCH
Collection of Mana is $19.99 at Best Buy
Final Fantasy XII: The Zodiac Age is $19.99 at Target and $24.99 at Amazon and Best Buy
The Legend of Zelda: Link’s Awakening is $49 at Amazon and Walmart
Overwatch Legendary Edition is $24.99 at Walmart and Best Buy
Sayonara Wild Hearts is $12.99 at Amazon (digital)
Wargroove is $14 at Amazon (digital)
Yoshi’s Crafted World is $39.99 at Amazon
PC
Bloodstained: Ritual of the Night is $24.99 on Steam
Borderlands 3 is $40.19 at Epic
Resident Evil 2 is $19.79 on Steam
The Outer Worlds is $44.99 at Epic


Comprehensive Understanding of Deep Learning
The program builds a solid foundation by covering the most popular and widely used deep learning technologies and its applications, including Computer Vision, Convoluted and Recurrent Neural Networks, Natural Language Processing, Tensor Flow and even Keras–laying the building blocks for truly expanded capabilities
World Class Faculty
Our faculty from IIT Bombay and Great Lakes have been integral to the development and widespread adoption of Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning. They have taught at the best institutions in the world, and have worked with the likes of Yann LeCun, a founding father of Convolutional Networks. Our faculty have also spent years honing their craft in the financial, automotive and healthcare industries.
Unique Delivery Formats
Our program formats are designed to marry the rigour, quality and outcomes of full-time offline courses with the ease of online learning. We offer our part-time courses in two modes: Blended format which is a unique mix of online content and weekend classroom sessions and Online assisted learning format which combines online content with personalized weekend mentorship sessions.
Guided Hands-On Projects
Build confidence in your ability by working on 12+ industry-relevant artificial intelligence and machine learning projects. These hands-on projects, with guidance from the program’s learning support team, will give you an opportunity to learn by doing. Through this program, you will build a project portfolio to showcase your expertise to the world.
According to the Consumer Federation of America, of the top ten consumer complaints in 2018, the third most frequent was concerned with retail sales: “False advertising and other deceptive practices, defective merchandise, problems with rebates, coupons, gift cards and gift certificates, failure to deliver.”

We all like to think that the retailers we buy from, either online or in person, are trustworthy, reasonably honest, and willing to honor their guarantees (as long as you pay attention to the small print). However, there are times when things go wrong: a package goes to the wrong address, a phone arrives with a ding in the case, the new TV set turns out to be the wrong model.

IF KICKING THE PROBLEM UPSTAIRS DOESN’T WORK, THEN THERE ARE SEVERAL STRATEGIES YOU CAN TRY
Often, simply contacting the retailer will fix the problem. If it’s obvious that the problem isn’t your fault, most retailers will either refund your money or provide you with a replacement. And sometimes, if it’s an understandable error (you clicked on model A2425A rather than model A2425B), they’ll make allowances.

If they don’t? If you’re trying to get satisfaction via the phone or in person and the staffer you’re talking to isn’t being helpful, sometimes simply requesting to talk to a manager (who is less dependent on the sale, and who has more power to tweak store policy) will make the difference.

If kicking the problem upstairs doesn’t work, then there are several strategies you can try. Note that you don’t have to try them one at a time; you can contact several of these resources simultaneously and see which responds.

TAKE TIME TO COOL OFF
There is actually a law administered through the Federal Trade Commission that mandates a three-day “cooling off” period to cancel a sale. There are a lot of exceptions to this rule; they include sales under $25 made at your home and sales made entirely online (thus leaving out anything you bought from, say, Amazon). But it’s good to know about, just in case.

COMPLAIN IN PUBLIC VIA SOCIAL MEDIA
Companies monitor the major social media outlets for any mentions of their services or products. Sometimes tweeting a short summary of your complaint, with the company’s Twitter account name appended, will bring a fast response.

CONTACT YOUR LOCAL CONSUMER PROTECTION OFFICE
Most states have consumer protection offices whose job it is to help with these problems; some states have several local offices as well. You can find out what’s available in your state here.

CONTACT YOUR STATE ATTORNEY GENERAL’S OFFICE
The National Association of Attorneys General has a page where all the current US state and territorial attorneys general are listed in alphabetical order (according to the state or territory with which they are associated). If you click on the photo of your state’s AG, it will lead to an information page with a link to their website. Click on the link, and you should be able to find either a form where you can register consumer complaints, or an email address where you can send a description of your problem.

CONTACT THE BETTER BUSINESS BUREAU
The Better Business Bureau has traditionally been a major resource for consumers. Using its site, you can check businesses to see what complaints they’ve received in the past, and you can register complaints of your own. According to the BBB website, it submits complaints within two business days; if the business doesn’t respond within two weeks, it submits the complaint again. Consumers are notified of the business’ response (if any).

REGISTER A COMPLAINT WITH THE FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION
The FTC has an online “complaint assistant” which runs you through a series of questions in order to help you file a complaint with the appropriate agency.

TRY SMALL CLAIMS COURT
If all else fails, there’s always small claims court. The amounts you can sue for, and the rules governing small claims court, vary from state to state. The do-it-yourself legal site Nolo.com has a good overview of what to consider and how to proceed. If the amount you’re suing for is more than the maximum allowed by small claims (which can range from $2,500 to $25,000, depending on the state), then it may be time to consult a lawyers
A group of filmmakers have sued the US government for making visa applicants hand over details about their social media accounts. The lawsuit argues that the requirement unconstitutionally discourages applicants from speaking online — and, conversely, discourages people who post political speech from trying to enter the US.

The US government has ramped up social media surveillance as part of President Donald Trump’s “extreme vetting” of immigrants. After initially asking a subset of applicants to provide information voluntarily, the State Department recently began requiring most visa applicants to list all social media accounts they’ve used in the past five years.

This lawsuit, filed by the Doc Society and the International Documentary Association, challenges the decision on First Amendment grounds. It calls the registration system “the cornerstone of a far reaching digital surveillance regime” that makes would-be visitors provide “effectively a live database of their personal, creative, and political activities online” — which the government can monitor at any time, long after the application process has been completed. Applicants must even disclose accounts that they use pseudonymously, and if US authorities fail to keep that information secure, it could potentially endanger people who are trying to avoid censorship from a repressive foreign government.

THE LAWSUIT WARNS OF “A FAR REACHING DIGITAL SURVEILLANCE REGIME”
Social media can be a minefield for people visiting the US, because posts can be easily misinterpreted by immigration officials. Earlier this year, an incoming Harvard freshman was blocked from entering the US apparently because his friends had made posts critical of the US government. (He was later readmitted.) Meanwhile, there’s little concrete evidence that the increased vetting has had positive effects on national security. And it’s part of a larger expansion of surveillance at the border — which can affect citizens and noncitizens alike. Earlier this month, the Department of Homeland Security revealed that it wanted to expand facial recognition usage to encompass identifying US citizens as they enter and exit the US, although it backed off this decision under criticism.

The plaintiffs in this lawsuit say that some non-US members have begun deleting social media content or stopped expressing themselves online because they’re afraid it will complicate their ability to enter the US. Others have decided to stop working in the country because they don’t want to reveal their social media accounts. “The Registration Requirement enables the government to compile a database of millions of people’s speech and associations, which it can cross-reference to glean more information about any given visa applicant,” warns the suit. And “the government’s indefinite retention of information collected through the Registration Requirement further exacerbates the requirement’s chilling effect because it facilitates surveillance into the future.”

Update 2:40PM ET: Updated to note the DHS backing off facial recognition plans
Only the best deals on Verge-approved gadgets get the Good Deals stamp of approval, so if you're looking for a deal on your next gadget or gift from major retailers like Amazon, Walmart, Best Buy, Target, and more, this is the place to be.

Vox Media has affiliate partnerships. These do not influence editorial content, though Vox Media may earn commissions for products purchased via affi
Disney entered the streaming market this year with the launch of its own streaming service, Disney+, home to Disney series and movies old and new. It’s proven to be a wildly popular competitor to Netflix and Hulu, with over 10 million people signing up on the day it launched.

If you haven’t subscribed to it yet (and the free year of Disney+ for Verizon customers doesn’t apply to you), this Black Friday deal will save you some money. For a limited time, you can get $10 off of a year’s subscription to Disney+. That brings the annual subscription price down to $59.99 from $69.99. The deal is only valid in the United States and Puerto Rico, and does not include a free trial. After the year runs out, you’ll be charged $69.99 unless you deactivate the subscription.

RELATED

Disney+: all the news and updates on Walt Disney’s streaming service
So whether you want to catch up on any Marvel releases you may have missed, or want to see Baby Yoda in The Mandalorian, or you just want to watch old Disney Channel Original Movies again, this is a pretty great deal.
Elon Musk’s tweets calling caver Vernon Unsworth, who was involved in the rescue of 13 people from a cave in Thailand, a “pedo guy” do not meet the legal standard for defamation, a jury found Friday afternoon. As a result, Musk will not be liable for damages.

The decision had to do with defamation law as the judge had laid it out. There were five points: first, that the statements had to be made to a person other than Unsworth; second, that the statements had to be understood to be about Unsworth; third, that the statements had to be understood to mean Unsworth was a pedophile; fourth, that the statements were false; and fifth, that the statements were reckless. “As soon as we got to point two, which was about being acquainted [with Unsworth], we decided,” Carl Shusterman, one of the eight members of the jury, told Buzzfeed News. “The people that read Musk’s tweet wouldn’t have known who he was talking about.”

Leaving the courtroom, Musk told reporters, “my faith in humanity is restored.” His attorney, Alex Spiro, said, “The jury did the right thing.”


Elizabeth Lopatto
✔
@mslopatto
Musk: “my faith in humanity is restored”

462
4:07 AM - Dec 7, 2019
Twitter Ads info and privacy
80 people are talking about this
Both Musk and Unsworth were present for the closing remarks. Musk appeared unhappy during the plaintiff’s closing remarks. Unsworth, whose back was to the jury, at times looked to be wiping tears from his eyes as Spiro spoke.

In closing remarks, Unsworth’s attorney, L. Lin Wood, characterized one of Musk’s tweets as “sue or true.” Wood said he believed Musk got involved in the Thai cave rescue as a publicity stunt. “I believe Elon Musk saw an opportunity to capitalize on the attention,” Wood said in his closing statement. Wood said that Musk’s tweets “dropped a bomb” on Unsworth, a nuclear bomb that would have radiation that might affect Unsworth for the rest of his life. Wood asked for $5 million in actual damages, $35 million in assumed damages and $150 million in punitive damages, which he characterized as a “hard slap on the wrist.”

In remarks to the press after the verdict, Wood said that the challenge from Musk was not to win the suit but merely to sue. “It’s not often that David beats Goliath,” Wood said outside the court building. Unsworth said he would “take it on the chin.”

With respect to Unsworth’s reputation, Wood said, “Anyone who knows Vernon Unsworth never believed the vile accusations of the billionaire bully.” The concern in the case was other people who might not know Unsworth — and potentially believe Musk, Wood said.

“IT’S NOT OFTEN THAT DAVID BEATS GOLIATH.”
Since Tuesday, the Los Angeles court has heard testimony from Unsworth, Musk, and others about the tweets. Musk has maintained that he viewed his tweets as insults, which are not defamation; on Tuesday, he testified that Twitter is “where people engage in verbal combat.” Unsworth said on Wednesday that he viewed the tweets as accusations, and he felt “dirtied” by them.

After a Thai soccer team and their coach were trapped in a cave system in July 2018, Unsworth — who had the best knowledge of the cave, rescuer Rick Stanton testified on Wednesday — assisted in rescue efforts. Musk had also built a “minisub,” which could be used as a plan B for rescuing the boys — in case the plan to drug the boys and swim them out using divers, which was ultimately successful, didn’t work out. In an interview with CNN, Unsworth said he viewed Musk’s involvement as a “PR stunt” with “absolutely no chance of working,” and that Musk could “stick his sub where it hurts.”
Musk watched the clip “two or three times,” he testified, before sending out the tweets in question. Musk testified that he didn’t know about Unsworth’s involvement in the rescue, assuming he was just some “ex-pat” living in Thailand. In his first tweet, he called Unsworth “sus.” In his last, he wrote “sorry pedo guy, you really did ask for it.” The tweets were “obviously a very off-the-cuff response,” and Musk deleted them and apologized for them.

Spiro reiterated in his closing remarks that the tweets were insults. Federal courts aren’t for people who insult each other, Spiro said. He also repeatedly asked about the whereabouts of Unsworth’s companion, a woman named Tik, who could have spoken to Unsworth’s emotional distress. Spiro also pointed out that Unsworth’s name did not appear in the tweets. “Who ever heard of an accusation of a crime against some dude?” he said. He characterized the exchange between Musk and Unsworth as an argument. “In arguments,” Spiro said, “you insult people.”
The holidays are approaching — and the retailers are in tight competition for your dollars. In order to convince you that they’re the place to buy, they are not just dropping prices on their products, but are making it a lot easier to have those products shipped, and to return them if the person you bought the laptop or the gaming console or the phone for doesn’t like it.

In fact, most retailers are offering special holiday season policies for shipping and returns — recognizing that (a) most shoppers are spending a great deal right now, and wouldn’t mind saving a bit on shipping, (b) many people will start getting nervous about getting their packages before the holidays, so faster shipping is better (and free faster shipping is better yet), and (c) since most of these are gifts that won’t be given until the end of the year, a two-week return policy won’t be useful to somebody buying a gift in November.
So here (in alphabetical order) are the current shipping and return policies for a selection of the major online retailers. Not all have specific holiday policies, but some have shipping and return policies that are just as good or better. We will keep an eye on these sites and update any changes we find as the holidays get closer.

Hopefully, knowing more about how much you’ll spend and how much leeway you have to make a return will help lessen your holiday angst somewhat.

AMAZON
Shipping: Prime members get free same-day delivery on qualifying orders over $35 in qualifying zip codes. Otherwise, the usual next-day or two-day deliveries apply, depending on the product. Non-Prime buyers will find shipping options on the order page of each specific product.

Returns: During the holidays, items shipped by Amazon between November 1st and December 31st can be returned until January 31st (this applies to both Prime and non-Prime buyers).

APPLE
Shipping: If you buy directly from Apple, two-day shipping is free on most items, and iPhones can get free next-day shipping.

Returns: Apple gives you 14 days to return a product from time of receipt.

B&H
Shipping: B&H offers free standard shipping (that’s three to seven business days) for most items and free expedited shipping (one to three business days) for items over $29.

Returns: B&H allows purchases bought between November 1st and January 1st to be returned up until February 1st (with the usual exceptions of non-returnable items such as computers or TVs whose packaging has been opened).
BEST BUY
Shipping: Best Buy is offering free shipping on everything purchased from October 22nd through December 25th. Special order delivery items, some scheduled delivery items, and items displaying “In Store Only” or “Check Stores” are not available for free shipping. If you’ve spent $35 or more, there is also the possibility of next-day delivery, depending on the item and when the order was placed.

Returns: Almost every purchase made throughout November and December can be returned through January 14th. Cell phones, cellular tablets, and cellular wearables have a 14-day return period; major appliances have a 15-day return period. My Best Buy Elite members have until January 14th or 30 days from receipt, whichever is longer; Elite Plus members have until January 14th or 45 days from receipt, whichever is longer.
COSTCO
Shipping: Costco quotes its shipping fees during checkout; fees depend on the product and the shipping method.

Returns: Costco generally has an open return policy, except for electronics such as TVs, computers, etc., which have a 90-day return window. There are other exceptions, which are listed on its return page.

DELL
Shipping: Most of Dell’s products come with free standard shipping.

Returns: Dell offers a 30-day return policy with some exceptions; a restocking fee of up to 15 percent may be charged.

DJI
Shipping: DJI offers free shipping on purchases of $159 or more. Otherwise, shipping fees are specified on the order form.

Returns: DJI offers returns within 14 days of receiving the purchase.

GameStop photo
GAMESTOP
Shipping: GameStop is offering free Edge (two-day) shipping on orders over $35.

Returns: GameStop is accepting any products purchased between November 1st and December 24th for return by January 15th. The packages must be unopened and you must have the receipt.

GOOGLE
Shipping: To qualify for free shipping in the US, your order total must be at least $35 before taxes and after any discounts are applied. (In Canada, the total must be $45 CAD; in Singapore, $40 SGD.) Separate, multiple orders cannot be combined to receive free shipping.

Returns: You have only 15 days to return an item you bought from the Google Store (30 days for a Nest Thermostat),

HP
Shipping: For many items, standard (three- to six-day) shipping is free; priority and next-day shipping is often available for an additional fee.

Returns: Purchases made between November 1st and December 25th may be returned until January 15th; you may have to pay a restocking fee of up to 15 percent.

Microsoft Store stock
MICROSOFT
Shipping: Most products sold through the online Microsoft store include free two-to-three day shipping.

Returns: Eligible items purchased October 1st to December 31st can be returned through January 31st.

NEWEGG
Shipping: Many of Newegg’s items come with free shipping; check the individual product page.

Returns: Newegg’s extended holiday return policy allows customers to return products until January 31st; you have to look in the “warranty & returns” tab on the product page to find out if it’s covered.

SAM’S CLUB
Shipping: According to the Sam’s Club FAQ, the shipping cost for most items varies based on the item’s size, weight, shipping method, and delivery address. Plus Members get free shipping on most online items.

Returns: Sam’s Club has no specified return period; some return periods may be stated for specific products.

SONOS
Shipping: Sonos offers free shipping on all its products.

Returns: Sonos gives you 45 days to return a purchase, and even offers free return shipping.

target 1020
TARGET
Shipping: Free two-day shipping until December 21st with no minimum purchase required but with some exclusions. Same-day delivery will be free November 17th through November 26th for orders of $75 or more that are made using the Target app.

Returns: You’ve got 90 days to return most unopened items; a full year if it’s a Target brand. (Exceptions will be noted on the receipt.)

WALMART
Shipping: Free next-day delivery on eligible orders of $35 and over in eligible zip codes.

Returns: Many items purchased between October 24th and December 25th have extended return dates. Items that usually have a 14-day return window will have a final return date of January 10th. Items that have a 30-day return window will have a final return date of January 25th. (There will be no change for items with 90-da

StopStop me if you’ve heard this one before: a video game platform that lets you play games with the press of a button, no need for discs or downloads. Tap on a YouTube ad for a game, and you’re instantly playing in your web browser. Experience the latest and greatest games on your ancient laptop, phone, or tablet, thanks to remote servers instead of having to buy a console or build a powerful gaming PC. Fire up a game on the TV, then seamlessly pick it up on your mobile device. Stuck in a game? Ask a friend to take over your controller from across the internet.

If that sounds like the lofty pitch for Google’s Stadia cloud gaming service, you’ve been paying attention. But every single one of those things was promised years ago by a startup named Gaikai — a startup that Sony bought in 2012 for $380 million. At the time, Sony gave every indication that it would harness the full potential of a PlayStation cloud. It even bought Gaikai’s closest competitor, OnLive, in 2015 and launched a service called PlayStation Now that finally hit 1 million subscribers this October. But half a decade later, the company has barely tapped into cloud gaming’s promise, and competitors like Google seem poised to attract the gamers that Sony failed to convert.

I doubt it’s a coincidence that Google and Gaikai’s pitches sound so similar. As Gaikai co-founder, CEO, and former PlayStation Now chief David Perry pointed out to me in an interview on the day Stadia debuted, Google gaming boss Phil Harrison used to sit on Gaikai’s advisory board. Jack Buser, Stadia’s head of business development, used to run Sony’s PlayStation Now. Heck, a clean-shaven Sundar Pichai was the one who first introduced how Gaikai could stream games natively in the Chrome web browser, three years before he became Google’s CEO.

Google Stadia review: the best of cloud gaming is still just a beta
The world is waiting for Google Stadia to flop
Mind you, Google is already having plenty of trouble meeting the lofty goals it cribbed from Gaikai, breaking many of the promises it made before launch. But how did Sony let Google become the front-runner in cloud gaming to begin with, after having the better part of a decade to freely build it out?
Let’s take a quick trip back to February 2013 when Sony introduced the PlayStation 4 and revealed Gaikai’s newfound role in the whole thing. When Perry strode onstage, he presented a vision of a PlayStation Network like we’d never seen before, one that would let you instantly try any game before you buy it. His words:
With the Gaikai cloud technology, our goal is to make free exploration possible for virtually any PlayStation 4 game in the PlayStation Store. Imagine you’re in the store, checking out the latest titles and you see something that catches your eye: no problem. You can simply press the X button to hop in and start playing the game. Now in the past, not all games were available, and the ones that were had to be kind of the ‘lite’ version, where they’d been edited down so they could be downloaded reasonably quickly. With Gaikai and the PlayStation Store, you’ll be able to instantly experience anything that you want. I’ve always liked that concept of try it for free, share it if you like it, and pay only for the games you fall in love with.
It’s easy to forget this was Gaikai’s pitch from the start: instant free demos of games you can try before you buy, using practically any device you own.
I got an exclusive first look at Gaikai in December 2010, and I’ll never forget what Perry asked me afterward: not whether the streaming quality was good, but if I’d experienced enough to figure out whether the game was worth buying. That was why Gaikai originally streamed games from YouTube and Facebook ads — they were legitimately ads! — though Gaikai was also willing to let publishers stand up their own servers and set their own pricing if gamers wanted to turn those ads into game time.
When I visited Gaikai’s headquarters in June 2012, I was amazed by how many endpoints Gaikai had already built. Both LG and Samsung TVs were slated to feature the service. It worked with an off-the-shelf Android tablet. Best Buy and Walmart had live game demos you could play on their websites, and you could share demos on Facebook with your friends and relatives they could play right inside the social network if you liked.
But Perry says most of that went out the window when he cashed Sony’s check. “After Sony acquired Gaikai, we went quiet. I stopped giving speeches, I stopped pushing this as the future of the industry ... We withdrew from all the deals,” he relates.
Though Perry says he’s loyal to Sony for buying Gaikai and eventually building a service with 1 million subscribers instead of just “shoving it somewhere in a drawer,” he says his personal opinion is that Sony didn’t really understand what to do with Gaikai, and the company started by trying to shoehorn Gaikai’s tech into a way to sell its own hardware.
“Sony acquired something that they thought would be a good idea to buy because they could feel the momentum, and I don’t think at the time it was clear to them which business they were in,” Perry says. “If you are in charge of PlayStation, are you in the hardware business or are you in the gameplay business? I don’t think that was clear. Because if you’re in the hardware business, this isn’t very interesting. If you’re the guys building hardware, and someone starts talking about the cloud, it’s just like, ‘Meh, we’ve got work to do.’”
And “meh” was definitely how I felt when Sony’s PlayStation Now cloud gaming service debuted. When an open beta launched in late 2014, it was ridiculed as the antiquated Blockbuster of video games: a service where you’d have to rent each PS3 title — and only PS3 titles — for more than you’d pay to buy a used disc at GameStop. It felt like an expensive way to cover for the fact that the PS4 wasn’t backwards compatible with PS3 games.
Sony later added a $20-a-month subscription service for a selection of less-desirable games alongside the rentals (it eventually ditched rentals altogether), and it expanded support to the PS3, PS Vita, PlayStation TV, a handful of Sony TVs and Blu-ray players, and even a few Samsung smart TVs.
But it took until late 2016 for Sony to finally let you play PlayStation games on a PC, and it was mid-2017 before it added a back catalog of current-gen PS4 titles instead of exclusively older games. And it was tough luck if you wanted to play those PS4 games on your Sony handheld or smart TV because Sony ditched every other platform, save PC and PS4, along the way. It was only this October that Sony finally dropped the price of PlayStation Now to a more reasonable $60 a year and deigned to add a few flagship games like God of War and Uncharted 4. But even those $20 “greatest hits” games will only be available to stream through January 2nd, 2020.
Even though Sony has finally stopped trying to use its PS4 Remote Play app to sell Sony smartphones, and it opened it up to iPhone and Android gamers (years after shutting down a perfectly good hack), there’s no parallel PlayStation Now mobile app in sight. Sony completely ceded the Gaikai / OnLive era idea of delivering cloud games directly to phones. That’s where Microsoft’s xCloud is now striking first and where Google and early Gaikai partner Nvidia may also have an opportunity.
There are reasons why Sony took it slow with Gaikai — they’re just unfortunate reasons — like how Sony’s initial PlayStation Now service relied on having actual PS3 hardware in the data center for every single player. That capped Sony’s physical and economic ability to expand the service as quickly as it might have liked. Or how the company wound up diverting its attention to VR.
“VR TOOK ALL THE AIR IN THE ROOM FOR A WHILE.”
“Cloud gaming is working. We’ve demonstrated it. We’re sort of waiting for things to get better and have more power in the cloud, faster internet speeds, all the rest of it ... And then VR comes out, and VR took all the air in the room for a while,” says Perry. He also points out that Sony never put much marketing behind PS Now or ran a real ad until last month. Sony also never wound up offering a bundle with its other subscription services like PlayStation Plus and PlayStation Vue, for that matter.

When I ask Perry what happened to the key part of his original vision — the idea that PS4 players would be able to instantly sample games for free — he admits that Sony never actually tried.
“It was something I was passionate about, but I don’t think it had the support of others,” says Perry, adding that he found it wasn’t necessarily compatible with “the harsh reality of business.” One example: he spoke to a publisher who told him, “David, we don’t want anyone to play our game.” When Perry asked why, he says they replied: “Because the trailer does a better job of convincing them our game is good. The game isn’t very good to be honest, but the trailer makes it look good.” It was a clarifying moment.
“WE DON’T WANT ANYONE TO PLAY OUR GAME.”
Even so, Perry says he believes gamers would “have to be insane not to sign up” for PlayStation Now at the new lower price, as long as they spend a lot of time gaming. “The amount of games you’re getting for the money is absurd.” But he also believes that Sony, Google, and other prospective cloud gaming providers need to stop trying to stick existing gaming components into their servers and convince publishers to build and share their best games instead of just a back catalog of titles. “They have to decide that this is the future.”
Perry’s somewhat worried that cloud gaming will adopt the same pattern we’re seeing with other streaming media today, where Disney and HBO and Apple and many more are all standing up their own video delivery services to compete with Netflix for our attention. “When things get out of control, you end up with multiple streaming services. And you want to watch Harry Potter, and you don’t know where it is,” he says. Sony had seven unchallenged years to convince publishers, but now Google, Electronic Arts, Ubisoft, Microsoft, Nintendo, Amazon, Verizon, Walmart, Nvidia, and others are all testing the waters for their own possible cloud gaming subscriptions.
None of this is to say Sony wasted those seven years or made the wrong decisions. The PlayStation 4 wound up becoming a phenomenal success. It’s the second best-selling console of all time having shipped over 102 million units, handily winning this console generation. PlayStation VR is also one of the best-selling console accessories ever, even if VR hasn’t taken off quite yet. And Sony did need to make some hard choices during the past decade to turn around its foundering business. This is the decade Sony decided it was no longer an electronics company, chopping off pieces of itself to survive.
Some of Gaikai’s know-how might have even been responsible for that success. In 2012, Gaikai showed me a demo where you could start playing a game while the rest of it downloads in the background — something that became a core feature of the PlayStation 4. Share Play, a feature that lets you see a friend’s screen from over the internet and then take over the controls, also eventually shipped. And even if Sony doesn’t become a front-runner in cloud gaming, buying Gaikai and OnLive early on means it has a lot of patents on the tech.
When I try it again for the first time in years, I have to admit PlayStation Now isn’t bad. I’m streaming God of War on my Windows desktop at a fairly lackluster 720p resolution, but with nary a hitch. There’s no way I’d spend $10 a month or $60 a year for that experience — not when I can own those same games permanently for $10 or less per disc — but I would pay if Sony gave me the latest games there. Better yet, I’d pay to get games that aren’t even possible on console, with hundreds or thousands of simultaneous players, incredibly advanced physics simulations, and AI-voiced NPCs that don’t just repeat the same pre-programmed lines of dialogue. It’s just not clear whether Sony has any intent to deliver those things — and now it’ll have to fight its own ideas in the hands of much wealthier adversaries like Google. All we know for now is that the PlayStation 5 is coming, and Sony has a vague interest in maximizing the “off-console opportunity” of cloud gaming as well.
In 2014, Perry claimed that Sony had “fully greenlit” a project where Gaikai would help build “the fastest global network ever made” to let gamers play like never before. That may still be the plan, but Sony’s going to need some help. That may be why it struck a cloud gaming partnership with Microsoft this May, teaming up with its chief rival.
Sony was one of the few companies that believed in cloud gaming enough to spend big in 2012, just as it was one of the few that believed in VR. But that wasn’t enough to make Sony a leader.


The LG G8 ThinQ isn’t the most amazing phone in the whole wide world, but it might just be the best bang for the buck this Black Friday. In April, we wrote that “you’ll get a lot of phone for your money” if you managed to find it at $699 — but today, you can snap up the unlocked version for just $400 at Amazon! That’s $450 off the original price.
These are the best Black Friday phone deals
LG G8 ThinQ review: many gimmicks, not enough progress
For that money, you’ll be getting a sharp 6.1-inch OLED-screened handset that works on any GSM or CDMA carrier and comes with flagship specs, including a Snapdragon 855 processor, 6GB of RAM, 128GB of storage, a large 3,500 mAh battery, twin rear cameras (including wide angle before wide angle was cool), a rear fingerprint sensor and an honest-to-goodness 3.5mm headphone jack with a high fidelity quad-DAC. If you’re still kicking around with wired headphones, LG is consistently one of the best brands to plug them into.
As a $850 phone, it felt pretty gimmicky, and the company doesn’t have the best track record with timely software updates. Plus, the G8X is now out with its dual screens at $700 on sale. But $400 for the G8 is a solid deal.
Still, you may want to check out our guide to all the best Black Friday phone deals before you commit — because $300 for a Pixel 3A or Razer Phone 2 is also solid savings for an amazing camera or speedy screen, an

Verizon, T-Mobile, and US Cellular overstated their 4G coverage in rural communities across the country, a Federal Communications Commission investigation determined on Wednesday. Despite the Commission’s findings, it will not punish the carriers in any way.

Throughout its investigation, the FCC staff ran speed and coverage tests in rural areas across the country to determine whether consumers were receiving sufficient download speeds. According to the FCC’s report, “only 62.3 percent of staff drive tests” met those thresholds. US Cellular achieved it only 45 percent of the time, while T-Mobile and Verizon met the standard at around 60 percent of the time. The FCC staff was unable to receive any 4G signal in 38 percent of US Cellular’s tests, 21.3 percent of T-Mobile’s, and 16.2 percent of Verizon’s.

In its report detailing the findings, the FCC wrote, “Overstating mobile broadband coverage misleads the public and can misallocate our limited universal service funds, and thus it must be met with meaningful consequences.” Outside of punishing carriers, the FCC staff recommended that the Commission assemble a team of staffers to audit the accuracy of the mobile broadband maps sent in from carriers and require carriers to “submit actual on-the-ground evidence of network performance.”

“OVERSTATING MOBILE BROADBAND COVERAGE MISLEADS THE PUBLIC”
T-Mobile stood by its maps, but told The Verge that it agrees “with the FCC that there is an opportunity to improve their procedures for collection of broadband coverage data for the Mobility Fund maps.” A spokesperson for US Cellular said “that the parameters adopted by the Commission for the submittal of broadband coverage maps would result in overstated coverage, so the conclusions in the staff report come as no surprise to us.”

Verizon did not immediately respond to requests for comment.

The FCC won’t be penalizing the carriers in any way. According to Axios, the FCC was unable to find a “sufficiently clear rule violation” of the Mobility Fund Phase II data reporting requirements that would warrant an enforcement action. Instead, the FCC will send out an advisory to the entire industry as a reminder that they could be punished for exaggerating their coverage maps.

The Commission also decided on Wednesday to drop its $4.5 billion Mobility Fund II 4G LTE subsidy plan and replace it with a $9 billion 5G deployment fund. In a press release, the FCC said that the overhaul was due largely because of the overstated coverage maps it had discovered. “Commission staff finds that the 4G LTE coverage data submitted by providers is not sufficiently reliable for the purpose of moving forward with Mobility Fund Phase II,” the release said.

Without accurate coverage maps, this money could go to waste. At a House Energy and Commerce hearing with FCC commissioners on Thursday, lawmakers challenged the agency’s decision to overhaul the Mobility Fund II in light of its coverage findings the day before. “It sounds good. I support the build out in 5G for rural areas, but I have no details on this plan,” Rep. Greg Walden (R-OR) said.

Democratic Commissioners Jessica Rosenworcel and Geoffrey Starks were dismayed by the Republican majority’s decision not to disclose the inaccuracy of the maps earlier. “I’m disappointed that we are not going to hold people accountable for those representations,” Starks said.

“We want to make sure that rural Americans enjoy these benefits, just as residents of large urban areas will,” FCC Chairman Ajit Pai said in a statement Wednesday regarding the new 5G fund. “In order to do that, the Universal Service Fund must be forward-looking and support the networks of tomorrow
As we mark 25 years of PlayStation this week, Sony’s grip on the home console market has rarely been stronger. The PS4 recently outsold the original PlayStation to become the second bestselling version yet behind the PS2, which will likely never be matched. It augurs well for the upcoming launch of the PS5. One part of the PlayStation story that is often overlooked, however, is Sony’s efforts with handhelds. You probably know the broad strokes: the PSP was overshadowed by the hugely popular Nintendo DS, while the PS Vita never took off at all. And now we have the Switch.

But it would be unfair to write off Sony’s travails in the portable gaming industry. The PSP and Vita were not only innovative devices in their own right, but the most daunting competitors Nintendo ever faced in the handheld space. They’re more than just a footnote in the PlayStation story.

The idea of a portable PlayStation was something that seemed inevitable as soon as it was clear that Sony was serious about games. While the original PlayStation comprehensively outsold the Nintendo 64 around the globe, the Game Boy essentially had the handheld market to itself during that time, so it was only natural to wonder what the new home console leader would be able to put in your pocket.

In Japan, at least, Sony had an answer right away: the PocketStation. In truth, this tiny gadget didn’t really count as a console — it was technologically closer to a Tamagotchi or the Dreamcast’s Visual Memory Unit than a Game Boy. It was also never released outside of Japan. But with its cute, low-res mini-games that connected to popular original PlayStation titles like Final Fantasy VIII and Street Fighter Alpha 3, the PocketStation was an early sign that Sony saw the potential in taking the PlayStation outside the home.

PS Vita
Photo by Vjeran Pavic / The Verge
The real bombshell dropped just ahead of E3 2003, when Sony announced the PlayStation Portable, or PSP. Although it wasn’t set for release until the following year, with many technical details left unclear, Sony Computer Entertainment president and CEO Ken Kutaragi’s description of the device as “the Walkman of the 21st century” served as an appropriate statement of intent. The news that the PSP would use a 480 x 272 widescreen LCD and a new 1.8-inch “UMD” optical disc format was enough to get people excited about what the PSP could do. This was clearly going to be leaps beyond the Game Boy Advance.

When the PSP was revealed in full in 2004, its success seemed like a foregone conclusion, particularly as Nintendo’s new competing device was so unconventional. The PSP had a high-resolution widescreen display, incredible graphics, multimedia capabilities, and an ultra-sleek industrial design. The DS, meanwhile, had two low-res screens, PS1-level graphics, archaic software, and looked like a communicator from Battlestar Galactica.

THE PSP’S SUCCESS SEEMED LIKE A FOREGONE CONCLUSION
The gap between the two devices was most starkly illustrated by their respective Ridge Racer games, which were both released around each system’s launch. Ridge Racer DS was a port of Ridge Racer 64 with janky graphics and unconvincing touchscreen controls. The PSP Ridge Racer, however, was a total reboot of the franchise with visuals that seemed impossible for a handheld system at the time. The comparison did not do Nintendo any favors.

The play for the high end of the market sounds like it would have been an obvious move for Sony, but in truth it was out of step with the company’s moves in the gaming industry to date. The Nintendo 64 certainly had bigger numbers to throw around on paper than the PS1, for example, while the PS2’s inferior specs didn’t stop it from steamrolling the Xbox and the GameCube. But with the PSP, Sony saw a broader opportunity in mainstream consumer electronics.

“It has gaming at its core, but it’s not a gaming device. It’s an entertainment device,” Kaz Hirai, Sony Computer Entertainment America head (and eventual Sony CEO), told CBS upon the PSP’s launch. In a classic Sony move, the company attempted to use the PSP to push sales of UMD movies that would only play on the console, even though they cost around the same as more versatile, better quality DVDs. The PSP was also a vehicle for Memory Stick Pro Duo, the doomed proprietary SD card competitor.

The PSP was everything that Sony claimed it would be (except perhaps a wireless wing mirror for a Formula One PS3 game, as was prematurely announced in 2006), and that’s ultimately why it lost out to the DS. Despite vastly inferior silicon, Nintendo turned the DS into one of the most popular video game systems of all time with software that made clever use of the touchscreen, a battery that lasted far longer, and flash-based media that made more sense for portable scenarios. Yes, the PSP’s UMD drive allowed for more expansive games… and yet another failed physical media format from Sony. The trade-off was that the PSP got much worse battery life than the DS, its games could take forever to load, and they often weren’t well-suited to portable play when they did.

PS Vita
Photo by Vjeran Pavic / The Verge
Still, the PSP was a great device with lots of fantastic games, and it reportedly sold more than 80 million units, a figure that puts it over the 3DS to date. It might not have been a winner, but it certainly wasn’t a failure. And when Sony started to think about a successor, it didn’t stray too far away from the PSP’s blueprint.

2011’s PS Vita was another full-throttle attempt to create the most powerful practical gaming handheld possible for its time. Just as the PSP could kinda-sorta be a PS2 in your hands, the Vita was kinda-sorta like a portable PS3. Its flagship launch title was a reasonably faithful Uncharted spinoff, just to prove the point.

Sony also addressed some of the PSP’s most obvious flaws with the Vita. It had a second analog stick, which made modern action games viable; physical games switched from optical media to proprietary flash cards, which improved performance and staved off piracy for a while; and the screen was updated to a five-inch 960 × 544 non-Pentile OLED panel, which was bigger and better than anything you’d find on pretty much any phone at the time. There were some features that turned out to be mostly useless, like the rear touchpad and an incomprehensible social network app, but the Vita hardware was overall very impressive.

SONY’S TECHNICAL ADVANTAGE WAS QUICKLY LOST TO PHONES
Unfortunately, the software never caught up. Beyond the launch flurry, Sony barely supported the Vita with high-profile first-party titles, and sales were never strong enough for third-party publishers to lend significant support. By the time Sony released its first and last revision to the Vita hardware in 2013, the platform had essentially settled into its niche as a really great portable indie game machine and PS4 Remote Play controller.

In hindsight, when the games industry was worried about what mobile gaming might do to traditional consoles around the turn of the decade, it only really applied to Sony portables in the end. Their extra features became redundant next to smartphones; popular genres shifted to commute-friendly free gacha titles; and Sony’s technical advantage was quickly lost to phones that got better and faster every year.

The PlayStation 4, on the other hand, outshone expectations and proved the relevance of dedicated console hardware. Nintendo handhelds never lost their appeal, meanwhile, but the leap in mobile capabilities and the failure of the Wii U opened the door for the company to push the envelope with the Switch. The new Switch Lite is, to all intents and purposes, a Vita done right.

Couldn’t Sony make a Switch-like console? Sure, but it’s hard to see how it’d play to Sony’s strengths more than the Switch does to Nintendo’s. It couldn’t be much more powerful, and it wouldn’t be compatible with games for the PS5, which Sony obviously wants you to hook up to your TV. It’s hard to see how it wouldn’t turn out like the Vita.

This is sad to say because of how impressive Sony’s handhelds were in their day. But perhaps, after these two and a half decades of Sony and Nintendo trading blows, each company has arrived at its most natural position. Nintendo is so focused on making the best portable console possible that it’s supplanted its own home console business altogether with a simple USB-C dock, while Sony has achieved great success with the PS4 simply by focusing on games. It’s hard to see either company straying too far from its path any time soon.

But the PSP in particular is a meaningful part of gaming history that deserves to be remembered. Without it, we wouldn’t have Lumines, Monster Hunter as an extant series, Metal Gear Acid, Persona 3 Portable, LocoRoco, Wipeout Pure and Pulse, two then-mindblowing Grand Theft Auto games, Jeanne d’Arc, Patapon, and I really could go on with this list but I won’t. (Except to note that to this day, there is no other other way to play OutRun 2 on public transit.)

While Sony probably won’t ever make another portable PlayStation, the two it did make were entirely worthy of the PlayStation name. Sony didn’t “win” — but the company still took part in spectacular fashion.
If you’ve been waiting to upgrade your Apple Watch, or you’re a first-time buyer, Black Friday 2019 has been ripe with big deals on Apple’s lineup of smartwatches. Eagle-eyed shoppers might have quickly swept up Walmart’s doorbuster sale that had the Apple Watch Series 3 down to $129 — its lowest price by a cool $70 — which we featured in our larger guide to Apple’s Black Friday deals. But there are still some opportunities to save, whether you’re interested in Apple’s more affordable Series 3 watch, or its more capable Series 5.

According to the Consumer Federation of America, of the top ten consumer complaints in 2018, the third most frequent was concerned with retail sales: “False advertising and other deceptive practices, defective merchandise, problems with rebates, coupons, gift cards and gift certificates, failure to deliver.”

We all like to think that the retailers we buy from, either online or in person, are trustworthy, reasonably honest, and willing to honor their guarantees (as long as you pay attention to the small print). However, there are times when things go wrong: a package goes to the wrong address, a phone arrives with a ding in the case, the new TV set turns out to be the wrong model.

IF KICKING THE PROBLEM UPSTAIRS DOESN’T WORK, THEN THERE ARE SEVERAL STRATEGIES YOU CAN TRY
Often, simply contacting the retailer will fix the problem. If it’s obvious that the problem isn’t your fault, most retailers will either refund your money or provide you with a replacement. And sometimes, if it’s an understandable error (you clicked on model A2425A rather than model A2425B), they’ll make allowances.

If they don’t? If you’re trying to get satisfaction via the phone or in person and the staffer you’re talking to isn’t being helpful, sometimes simply requesting to talk to a manager (who is less dependent on the sale, and who has more power to tweak store policy) will make the difference.

If kicking the problem upstairs doesn’t work, then there are several strategies you can try. Note that you don’t have to try them one at a time; you can contact several of these resources simultaneously and see which responds.

TAKE TIME TO COOL OFF
There is actually a law administered through the Federal Trade Commission that mandates a three-day “cooling off” period to cancel a sale. There are a lot of exceptions to this rule; they include sales under $25 made at your home and sales made entirely online (thus leaving out anything you bought from, say, Amazon). But it’s good to know about, just in case.

COMPLAIN IN PUBLIC VIA SOCIAL MEDIA
Companies monitor the major social media outlets for any mentions of their services or products. Sometimes tweeting a short summary of your complaint, with the company’s Twitter account name appended, will bring a fast response.

CONTACT YOUR LOCAL CONSUMER PROTECTION OFFICE
Most states have consumer protection offices whose job it is to help with these problems; some states have several local offices as well. You can find out what’s available in your state here.

CONTACT YOUR STATE ATTORNEY GENERAL’S OFFICE
The National Association of Attorneys General has a page where all the current US state and territorial attorneys general are listed in alphabetical order (according to the state or territory with which they are associated). If you click on the photo of your state’s AG, it will lead to an information page with a link to their website. Click on the link, and you should be able to find either a form where you can register consumer complaints, or an email address where you can send a description of your problem.

CONTACT THE BETTER BUSINESS BUREAU
The Better Business Bureau has traditionally been a major resource for consumers. Using its site, you can check businesses to see what complaints they’ve received in the past, and you can register complaints of your own. According to the BBB website, it submits complaints within two business days; if the business doesn’t respond within two weeks, it submits the complaint again. Consumers are notified of the business’ response (if any).

REGISTER A COMPLAINT WITH THE FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION
The FTC has an online “complaint assistant” which runs you through a series of questions in order to help you file a complaint with the appropriate agency.

TRY SMALL CLAIMS COURT
If all else fails, there’s always small claims court. The amounts you can sue for, and the rules governing small claims court, vary from state to state. The do-it-yourself legal site Nolo.com has a good overview of what to consider and how to proceed. If the amount you’re suing for is more than the maximum allowed by small claims (which can range from $2,500 to $25,000, depending on the state), then it may be time to consult a lawyer.

Vox Med
The Verge Guide to Black Friday
These are the best Black Friday deals on Apple’s iPad, AirPods, MacBook, iPhone, and more
WHERE YOU CAN STILL BUY A DISCOUNTED APPLE WATCH SERIES 3
Walmart has sold through its inventory of Apple’s 38mm and 42mm Series 3 watches with GPS capability, which were sold earlier today for $129 and $149, respectively. As far as what else Walmart does have in stock, you can buy the Series 3 38mm watch with GPS and cellular capabilities for $229.

Target has limited stock of the 38mm Series 3 watch with GPS, but not at Walmart’s low price. It’s $169, and is currently only available for pick-up at certain stores. Still, that’s $30-$60 cheaper than it sold for last year at Black Friday. And if you are able to find this watch at Target (or make any other purchase over $50 today), you’ll get a 20-percent off coupon for you to use on a future purchase. If you’re dead-set on the Series 3, there’s currently not much else to choose from at Target.

Best Buy is also offering the 38mm Series 3 watch, though its starting price is the highest at $189. It currently doesn’t offer the 42mm version of this model, and its prices for the GPS and cellular version of the watch is oddly in the $500 range.

B&H Photo is offering the Series 3 in the 38mm size for $189, like Best Buy. It is also selling the 42mm size at $219 (it’s backordered, but B&H is still taking orders). Neither are the best prices we’ve seen during Black Friday, but they’re not so bad if you really wanted to pick this one up today.


Photo by Vjeran Pavic / The Verge
WHERE YOU CAN STILL FIND A DISCOUNTED APPLE WATCH SERIES 5
While Walmart had the best deal on the Series 3, the newer Series 5 was at its cheapest-ever price at Amazon and Costco. Granted, that discount was no more than $30 off of its usual sale price, but it brings this close enough to the price of Apple’s Series 4 watches that they’re easier to recommend splurging on, if only for the always-on display that, somehow, doesn’t have much of a negative impact on its battery life.

If you’re looking for these watches, you won’t have to jump around from retailer-to-retailer as much. These deals started before Black Friday, and both retailers have shown no sign of running out of stock. The GPS version of the 40mm Series 5 smartwatch is down to $354.99 (Amazon and Costco), which is $24 off of its usual price. The 44mm version Series 5 is $384.99 (Amazon and Costco), which is also $24 cheaper than usual.

It’s worth noting that for the Amazon deal, you’ll need to add the Series 5 watch to your cart to see the discount reflected in the total. If you’re buying from Costco, you don’t need to be member, but you’ll need to pay a five percent fee when you check out.

Other retailers like Best Buy and Target sell this model, but they’re currently around $40-50 more expensive than the ones listed above.
You’veYou’ve been on horseback for quite some time. Hawks circle above these humanless plains, steeped in an overwhelming sense of despondency. As you inch your way toward the mountain’s peak, drawing ever nearer to the blistering sun high above, something begins to happen. The summit is in sight, has been reached, has been conquered. And there it is: sublimity. Before you is the colossus, roaming round and round below, perfectly blissful and decidedly uninterested in you.

It’s tragic. This docile wonder exists in a world of its own, self-contained and ambivalent toward anything outside the small ecosystem it has fostered. You, however, parasitic human that you are, must slay it. It’s an intrusion on quiet, innocuous solemnity, and it will haunt your thoughts pervasively and perpetually thereafter. The stone leviathan felled, you leave this modest haven behind deprived of the awe it once knew, once inherently held. Lonelier than ever, the introspection kicks in: what have you just killed, and for what reason — at what cost?

Shadow of the Colossus is perhaps Team Ico’s most universally beloved game and is often regarded as director Fumito Ueda’s magnum opus. Released in 2005, it shares a long history with the PS2, and has since become recognized as one of the most significant games ever to fall under Sony’s umbrella. It’s one of just three games Team Ico has released over the last 18 years — so what makes it such a revered studio in PlayStation history?
It’s easy to compare games based on differences instead of similarities. At first glance, 2001’s Ico seems totally different to Shadow in both premise and scale, but the two were mined from the same vein of minimalism and melancholy. Ueda famously conceived and created Ico in tandem with self-described principles of subtraction, seeking to remove clutter that interfered with the team’s vision for the narrative and story. It was a game stripped back to raw ideas, beautifully designed and meticulously implemented.

The results were incredible. Ico pairs you, an ostracized boy locked away in a tower, with Yorda, a princess due to be sacrificed in exchange for her mother’s eternal youth. Together you attempt to escape the fortress you’re imprisoned in, and although your bond grows as you progress through the game, the sublime layer of sadness is never fully removed. The story is propelled almost entirely without dialogue, and the colors used throughout naturally invite you to become absorbed by the wistfulness the game is founded upon. Although the two children find solace in one another, they grew up alone, deprived, unseen — and now, even as they try to run away, these feelings lurk in the shadows behind them, always in hot pursuit, refusing to soften their grip.

ITS SIMPLICITY IS WHAT MAKES IT SPECIAL
Like Shadow after it, Ico asks you to give free rein to emotion. However, it does so without overt exposition, or mechanical complexity, or any other structure championed in most successful games. Its simplicity is what makes it special, and its nonchalant skew away from dialogic sequences allows it to evoke this emotion in other, more primally sensory ways. In many respects, Ico set the stage Shadow performed on — and perform Shadow did, earning itself an ovation still standing 14 years later.

Both Ico and Shadow became staples of the PS2 era, and have since been assimilated into Sony’s oeuvre of iconic games. Each game received the remaster treatment, with Shadow in particular being the subject of a mass overhaul for Bluepoint’s ambitious remake — Shadow was even labeled as a greatest hit for the PS2. However, Team Ico wanted a last hurrah before the generation’s ephemeral run was up. One more game to complete the trifecta of melancholic masterpieces on the bestselling console of all time: The Last Guardian.
Shadow of the Colossus.
It didn’t happen. In fact, The Last Guardian remained in purgatory so long that the entire PS3 era passed it by. When it finally launched in 2016, 11 years had elapsed since Shadow first garnered the studio global attention. In an interview with The Verge from 2016, Ueda largely attributed this to the difficulties in bestial cat / bird / dog Trico’s technical design. Although he originally sought to create a character that wasn’t “very high maintenance from a technical standpoint,” the character’s evolution grew in direct proportion to his technical demands.

To make matters worse, the reception to The Last Guardian was, at least initially, lukewarm at best. Critics damned the game’s clunkiness, mostly citing mechanical issues related to Trico, even despite his makeup being the primary reason for the game’s many delays. And yet The Last Guardian is perhaps the greatest achievement in emotional evocation that video games have ever known.

‘THE LAST GUARDIAN’ REMAINED IN PURGATORY SO LONG THAT THE ENTIRE PS3 ERA PASSED IT BY
Consider the scene that opened this piece: you climb the mountain, witness a wonder, and slaughter it dead. Now take that scene, strip away its worldliness, condemn it to fractured chambers lying deep beneath any semblance of civilization, and assign it a ruler so devoid of humanity that the existence of this world within our own begins to revel in its own lack of sense, absence of purpose. The Last Guardian isn’t sad or lonely because you, a young boy stolen away from his village in the dead of night, are imprisoned here. The Last Guardian is steeped in sadness and solitude because you form a strange bond with the most unlikely of mythological curios deep within this dark recess, and that bond is strained, wrenched into arrest, torn apart, sewn together again, and ultimately smashed into smithereens so fine they dissipate into thin air, still existing but never to be seen again.

Trico is the symbol of what a Team Ico game fundamentally is: a hopeless search for connection in a world devoid of meaning. That’s what imbues these games with the magic they’ve become known for. At all times you’re utterly absorbed by the links you form with the world around you, with the single soul you share your journey with — Yorda in Ico, your trusty horse Agro in Shadow, and Trico in Guardian — while simultaneously being swallowed whole by somber pondering on the nothingness in front of you. To put it more accurately: the wonder in front of you that is relegated to nothingness because it is unrealized by humanity, doomed to exist in perpetual beauty without acknowledgement. If something is sublime, but unseen, is it truly sublime? In aesthetic, yes, objectively so — in essence, however, not even a little bit.

Eighteen years have transpired since Team Ico joined Sony’s roster. In that time, the studio has become a titan in the industry, but not a conventional one. A fine thread has been woven throughout its three games, spiritually linking them to one another without ever acknowledging interconnectivity. Perhaps it’s better to say that the only acknowledgement of sameness is strictly thematic: hopelessness, isolation, defeat — hope, connection, triumph.

Interestingly, these powerful juxtapositions have gone on to influence a variety of artistically ambitious indie titles since. Journey boasts a minimalistic art style not unlike that of a Team Ico game, whereas Fez designer Phil Fish once told Gamasutra: “From Ico, I wanted to replicate that feel of a nostalgic, lonely isolation ... it’s really about walking around and smelling the flowers.”
These wordless worlds remain vivid in the mind’s eye of those who vicariously inhabit them. Impossible to forget, their watercolor grace both belies and accentuates the poignancy at their core. It’s beautiful, but there are charged emotions held deep within the hues.
THE ONLY CONSTANT IS LONELINESS
Consider Trico’s eyes. When hijacked by the Master’s control rooms, they burn an effulgent pink, so overbearingly bright that they become mesmerizing. While this seems to convey a sense of rage unleashed, there’s much more to these commandeered pupils. The glow is delicately designed, meticulously colored. At their phosphorescent core, they are pale — they are pathetic. This is rage forcefully imposed on Trico, not rage truly felt. Behind those frenzied eyes lie fear, guilt, and powerlessness.
Now consider them when they’re emerald green: at their core, they are natural, trusting, and utterly sublime. But the fact remains that both shades exist, and shades between them, too. That’s one of the most extraordinary things these games have brought to PlayStation: for every shade of green, or pink, or atomic tangerine, there are ephemeral, ever-changing tints beneath them. The only constant is loneliness — and yet, at the same time, there is comfort and connection. And as these opposite states flirt with one another, they wrench your curiosity and heartstrings, drawing you nearer to these worlds and fixing a knot that keeps you bound to them forever — to their melancholy, their beauty, their yet-to-be paralleled sublimity.
As we approach the end of this console generation, it’s impossible to consider Team Ico as anything other than one of the most intrinsically important and artistically singular studios Sony has ever been fortunate enough to work with. And although Fumito Ueda left Sony midway through developing The Last Guardian (he stayed on as a contract employee to finish the project), it’s likely that his new studio, GenDesign, will carry the torch Team Ico left behind.
In fact, it has already been announced that GenDesign is working on a new game — if Ueda’s past work is anything to go by, this fourth contribution to PlayStation history is sure to fall in thematic line with the three monumental games for which he’s known
Michael Bloomberg temporarily had a tiny but extremely questionable advantage in the 2020 presidential race: if you typed “Mike” into one of his company’s roughly 325,000 news terminals around the globe, you were redirected to his campaign site, reported the Financial Times.
The FT made this GIF, so you can see for yourself just how fully that query thrust you into Bloomberg’s candidacy:
Apparently, the FT’s story caused the former New York City mayor to reconsider, though. A Bloomberg spokesperson tells The Verge that the redirect now goes to his biography page instead. They also claim that it was an honest mistake, saying “Mike” had pointed to Bloomberg’s personal website since the 1990s, a website that didn’t previously feature his presidential candidacy but was instead focused on his philanthropic work. The spokesperson said they’d made a mistake not to change the redirect when the nature of his website changed.
As I just emailed @adamsamson :  "We've updated that function to go to the bio page just like anyone else. Thanks for pointing out what was clearly an oversight when the site became a campaign site."
See Ty Trippet's other Tweets
It’s not like the Bloomberg Terminal redirect would have necessarily been a huge boon for Bloomberg’s candidacy. After all, there are only 325,000 of these expensive $20,000-a-year terminals around the world at last count, only a fraction of them in the US, and which are mostly in the hands of stock traders and news publications who would undoubtedly be aware that he’s running for president. But after the reveal that Bloomberg News is being barred from investigating Bloomberg (or his Democratic opponents), it felt worth mentioning that Bloomberg may have unfairly used his terminal as well.

A Bloomberg spokesperson initially suggested to the FT that this redirect wasn’t out of the ordinary, pointing out that it had been used to promote Bloomberg’s books. I probably don’t have to point out that the stakes are a lot higher now.
Leaders from 197 countries are hammering out the details of one of the most contested strategies for tackling climate change: international carbon markets, which allow countries to offset their planet-heating emissions by funding green projects elsewhere. As delegates negotiated at the annual United Nations climate conference in Madrid this week, protests unfolded over the carbon-cutting scheme, which some environmental activists called “a false solution.”
Existing carbon markets have a checkered past, and unless tighter rules are put in place moving forward, new carbon markets could actually make the climate crisis worse. That’s because, with a poorly designed system, there’s the risk that carbon credits could offer polluters an opportunity to get out of actually having to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions.
“CHEATING, GREENWASHING, AND DECEIVING PEOPLE”
“Without proper oversight and robustness, these mechanisms would severely undercut climate actions by creating loopholes,” said Yamide Dagnet, a senior associate at the environmental think tank World Resources Institute, during a December 2nd press conference in Madrid. “It could be no less than cheating, greenwashing, and deceiving people.”
The term “carbon markets” covers a huge range of strategies that all work in similar ways. Generally, they provide an economic incentive for countries or corporations to reduce their carbon footprint. Instead of cutting down its own emissions, a polluting company or country can purchase carbon “credits” from another entity that overachieved in reducing its own carbon footprint. Or the polluter might offset its greenhouse gas emissions by investing in a reforestation initiative or renewable energy project. Money gets funneled into green projects, and the most successful carbon-cutters can make a profit.
On paper, it sounds great. Big polluters looking to reduce their environmental impact get more options. Money often flows into developing nations that could use an infusion of cash. It encourages global cooperation since a ton of carbon emissions are a ton of carbon emissions whether they’re produced in Zimbabwe or Switzerland. Not to mention, it’s often cheaper to take measures to keep that carbon out of the atmosphere in a developing nation as opposed to a developed one.
“If you use the logic of carbon markets correctly, then you can significantly reduce the cost of decarbonisation. And guess what, you can help a lot of developing countries,” Satyajit Bose, associate director of Columbia University’s program in sustainability management, tells The Verge.

Indigenous youth from @Native_Mvmt and @Indigenous_ca held an action against the carbon offsets in Article 6 of the Paris Agreement here at the U.N’s #COP25 #OffsetsPollute
But people who call some of the places most vulnerable to climate change home, like Moñeka De Oro with the Micronesia Climate Change Alliance, are worried about what carbon markets could mean for them. De Oro, who lives in Guam and is attending the summit in Madrid, points to islands in the Pacific being threatened by more superstorms, rising sea levels gobbling up entire islands, and more acidic oceans harming sea life. “Carbon markets and offsets are false solutions and we really want real solutions,” she says.
Carbon markets are so complex and controversial that the tactic was the last article agreed upon in the landmark Paris climate agreement in 2015 when all the world’s countries agreed to work together to limit global warming before it reaches catastrophic levels. Since that deal was hashed out, the United Nations’ yearly climate conferences have focused on developing a rulebook governing how the Paris agreement will be implemented. Carbon markets have been such a sticky topic that it’s the last item left to tackle in the rulebook. Now the issue is taking center stage in Madrid during the summit, which takes place from December 2nd to 13th. But there’s still concern that the matter will remain unresolved — or worse, that weak rules governing carbon markets could undermine global efforts on climate change.
“BETTER TO HAVE NO RULES THAN TO HAVE BAD RULES”
“It’s really important to get it right. It’s better to have no rules [finalized in Madrid] than to have bad rules,” says Bose. Good rules, according to Bose and the World Resources Institute, would prevent countries that trade carbon credits from double-counting their emissions cuts. They would also ensure that countries that offset their emissions are putting their money toward projects that wouldn’t otherwise have gotten off the ground, instead of funding an initiative that was already set to take place with or without the carbon credits it generated.
Those are lessons learned from the carbon market that emerged from the Kyoto Protocol, a precursor to the Paris agreement that only involved emissions reductions targets from 37 industrialized nations. One 2016 study from the European Commission found that the majority of projects funded through the Kyoto Protocol’s carbon market likely failed to deliver any additional carbon emissions reductions.
“There were many complications, let’s say, that erupted,” Christiana Figueres, who led the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change when the Paris accord was adopted, tells The Verge. Despite the challenges, Figueres says the carbon market was productive. “To derive some lessons learned from that is definitely important,” she says.
But not everyone is convinced those lessons have been learned. “Our main beef is that first and foremost, these carbon offsets and carbon markets don’t cease pollution at source,” says Anthony Rogers-Wright with the US-based Climate Justice Alliance, which has advocated against including carbon markets in the Paris agreement at all. He says there’s more to think about than global gains in greenhouse gas emissions reductions. Reducing countries’ dependence on oil and gas can also have the added benefit of protecting communities that have been harmed along the supply chain for fossil fuels. “We reject the idea that any solution would require certain communities to continuously be treated as sacrifices for the production of energy,” Rogers-Wright says.
TIME IS RUNNING OUT
Time is running out to get the greenhouse gas emissions cuts needed to avoid disaster, according to the UN Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, and most countries still aren’t doing enough. Carbon emissions are still climbing, growing 4 percent since the Paris agreement was adopted, according to new research released this week. Against that backdrop, there’s a pileup of urgency to get the world working together to kick its fossil fuel habit — and to get it done right.
Any decisions that the delegates make in Madrid will likely be announced next week. At that point, groups on both sides of the carbon market debate will have a better sense of what the future of this complicated system might be. Until then, it’s important to remember what’s on the line with this policy debate. “Our very livelihoods are at stake here,” De Oro says.

PODCASTS FROM THE VERGE
Weekly shows to listen to with earbuds, headphones, Airpods, and more

Hosted by Nilay Patel, Dieter Bohn, and Paul Miller with appearances from the rest of The Verge’s diverse and wide-ranging staff, The Vergecast is the only show you need to make sense of the week in tech news. Published weekly, it gives an irreverent and informative look at what’s happening right now (and next) in the world of technology and gadgets.
In addition to the Friday show audiences know and love, Nilay Patel is now hosting a second weekly episode interviewing major figures from the tech world. Recent guests have been Microsoft president and chief legal officer Brad Smith, Sonos CEO Patrick Spence, Ford Autonomous Vehicles President and CEO Sherif Marakby, and Public Knowledge senior counsel Meredith Rose.
Subscribe on Apple Podcasts | Google Podcasts | Spotify | Pocket Casts | TuneIn | RSS
WHY’D YOU PUSH THAT BUTTON?
Hosted by The Verge’s Ashley Carman and Vox.com’s Kaitlyn Tiffany, Why’d You Push That Button is a podcast about the choices technology forces us to make, featuring interviews with consumers, developers, friends, and strangers. It asks the hard, weird, occasionally dumb questions about how your tiny tech decisions impact your social life, like swiping on dating apps, leaving negative restaurant reviews, or indiscriminately liking celebrity photos on Instagram.

The NFL is hoping big data tools can help bring down the number of concussions, ligament tears, and other injuries sustained in each game of professional football. Currently, the injury count per game is holding steady at an average of six or seven. League engineers are working with Amazon Web Services to apply machine learning and artificial intelligence tools to player data, with the hope of finding in-game situations that commonly lead to injury, The Wall Street Journal reported this week.

“Ultimately, we will be able to identify injury risk scenarios, and we will be able to predict injury risk scenarios, and we will be able to find innovations that will make the game safer for our athletes while maintaining high quality of play,” Jeff Crandall, chair of the NFL’s engineering committee, said during the program announcement.
The NFL and Amazon have vast resources at their disposal. But injuries, especially in chaotic sports like football, are incredibly hard to predict. “It’s the holy grail. Everyone wants to do it, and no one can,” says Zachary Binney, an epidemiologist and consultant who has worked with Major League Baseball and college sports teams on injury prevention. “I’m skeptical until I see results.”
Predicting injuries is challenging because there are so many factors that could contribute to a possible injury, from an athletes physical characteristics on a particular day to slight divots on a field. One athlete might have five attributes that research shows puts them at risk for an injury and still not get hurt, but another might look perfectly fine and tear a ligament the next day. “It is just an incredibly difficult problem,” Binney says.
The Amazon Web Services partnership will try to close the gap with league-level data from the NFL’s Next Gen Stats, which capture location data, speed, and acceleration for every player on the field hundreds of times a minute through microchips in their pads. It also includes video footage of games, information on playing surface and environmental factors, and anonymized player injury data, according to the NFL. It doesn’t collect data on how hard body parts are hitting the ground or other players, which is one limitation, Binney says. But it can see, with granular detail, how and at what speed a player ran a play, changed direction, or made a tackle. The goal is to find out if any common elements of football are more likely than others to lead to any injury.
“You could look at what happens when a wide receiver moving this quickly makes this sharp turn, and might be able to tease something out,” Binney says.
The league-level data only includes some measures of player activity. Individual teams have more granular level data on their players, typically tracking things like heart rate, fatigue, hydration, and other measures — all of which can contribute to injury risk for a particular player. Other risk factors for injuries in football include flexibility, injury history, strength, and body composition. However, much of the player-specific data stays at the team level, to avoid giving their opponents potentially useful information about how their players are doing.
Player health data will not be included in the injury prediction program, according to an email from an NFL spokesperson to The Verge. That might affect its predictive power. “It will be really interesting to see. I don’t know what impact that might have, and I can’t imagine that they do yet either,” Binney says.
Even without the more granular information, the league has data on the athletes from all 32 teams, which gives them more to work with. “You’re losing some of the resolution on the data, but increasing the sample size,” Binney says.
In the past, employees at the NFL have manually gone over hundreds of hours of game footage and helmet impacts to identify situations that lead to injury, and made changes — like updates to the kickoff rules — with the goal of preventing them. Binney speculates that the project could lead to additional changes, but that any information they’re able to gather could have additional value beyond that. “One thing they could do is put the information out there and tell coaches that when they ask a lineman to do some kind of block, or route, it creates the sorts of changes in direction or deceleration when we see bad things happen,” he says. It’s in the best interest of coaches, after all, to keep players healthy, and there could be alternatives to riskier plays.
If the NFL’s efforts into injury prediction and prevention prove effective, they might offer a road map to other sports, as well. Binney says it’s a positive step. “I’m excited to see it happen, even though I’m cautious about how much we might be able to draw from it.”
As cellphones got smarter, they also became marginally more dangerous to the clumsy, easily distracted humans holding them, according to new research. Before phones came loaded with perilous pings from Twitter, read receipts, or news alerts, the researchers found, they posed less of a risk to the integrity of their users’ faces.
Around 2007 — the year the first iPhone was released — the number of head injuries caused by cellphones spiked, according to this new study, which was published in the journal JAMA Otolaryngology–Head & Neck Surgery. That number has continued to rise over the past decade. “The phone went from being a phone to being a mobile platform,” says study author Boris Paskhover, a head and neck surgeon at Rutgers New Jersey Medical School. Old-school phones didn’t distract people so much that they tripped and cut their eyelids. They also didn’t slip out of people’s hands and fall on their noses, and they didn’t contain the medical hazard that is Pokémon Go. Smartphones, though, do. “People stopped being aware of their surroundings,” he says.
Paskhover pulled data from between 1998 and 2017 on cellphone-related injuries to the head and neck from the National Electronic Injury Surveillance System (NEISS) database, which holds information about injuries treated in emergency departments at around 100 United States hospitals. Then, the team used that information to estimate the total number of cellphone-related injuries in the country.
The 100 hospitals in the database reported 2,501 cases of cellphone-related injuries between 1998 and 2017, which the authors estimate is the equivalent of just over 76,000 injuries nationwide during that same time period. Around 40 percent of injuries were in people between the ages of 13 and 29, and the most common diagnosis was a deep cut.
Cellphone injuries fall into one of two categories, with roughly the same number in each: direct mechanical injuries (like someone dropping their phone on their face or hitting a sibling with a phone) and cellphone use-associated injuries, like someone tripping on the sidewalk while they were distracted by Instagram. Kids under the age of 13 were far more likely to suffer direct injuries — they accounted for 82 percent of the injuries to that group — while older adults above the age of 50 were more at risk of use-associated injuries.
For Paskhover, the use-associated injuries are the most concerning. Most of those injuries came while people were distracted; they were driving and texting, or walking while looking at their phones. Ninety of the injuries he looked at occurred because people were distracted by Pokémon Go.
Getting slammed in the face by a phone is objectively not great, and it makes sense that doctors like Paskhover would be alarmed. But it’s also important to note that most injuries weren’t very serious. Nearly 95 percent of people who reported injuries were either treated in the emergency department and immediately sent home, or sent home without treatment. And the 76,000 estimated injuries breaks down to only around 4,000 per year, which is less than half of the number of children who go to the emergency room with burns from instant soup each year and 0.02 percent of the number of people injured on trampolines in 2017.
The study only included head and neck injuries, though, not injuries to other body parts. In addition, the numbers are probably far lower than the actual number of injuries related to cellphones, Paskhover says. “I think it’s severely underreported,” he says. “If someone is walking down the street and they drip and fall, they’re not going to say that they were being a schmuck and looking at their phone. They just say they tripped and fell.”
Paskhover sees patients when they’re already injured and need the damage to their faces fixed. He’d like fewer of those cases make it to his office. “How often do you see people bumping into each other while they’re walking? Clearly people wouldn’t read a magazine while they’re walking, but they’d read an article on their phone,” he says. “People are crossing Park Avenue in New York City without looking. They’re going to get hit.

We’re still waiting on news from the first Game of Thrones prequel that HBO is developing, but the premium cable network doesn’t seem content to stop there. A new report from Deadline claims that a second prequel series — this time based on Fire and Blood, Martin’s fictional history book detailing the Targaryen dynasty — is nearing a pilot order.
Game of Thrones finally ended earlier this year, but HBO was already hard at work on proposals for no fewer than five prequel and spinoff ideas before the hot takes from the final season had even finished cooling.
We already know what one of those proposals is: a prequel set thousands of years before the original show and books in the “Golden Age of Heroes,” created by Jane Goldman and series author George R.R. Martin, which shot a pilot episode earlier this summer. Back in May (just before the original show ended), Martin noted on his blog that two more of the ideas were still in play and “edging closer” to something more concrete, suggesting that “maybe some of you should pick up a copy of Fire & Blood.”
Deadline says that the new Fire and Blood series is a second attempt at adapting the novel from Martin and Colony co-creator Ryan Condal, following an initial attempt by former Game of Thrones writer Bryan Cogman to adapt that novel that HBO passed on.
Fire and Blood is certainly... a choice for a Thrones show. Unlike the Goldman series (tentatively referred to by Martin as The Long Night), Fire and Blood chronicles the 300 years directly preceding the events of Game of Thrones. It starts with Aegon the Conqueror, the first Targaryen king of Westeros who conquered Westeros with his siblings, and it goes all the way through Aerys II, the Mad King, who GOT fans will recognize as Daenerys’ father and the last of the Targaryen kings.
There are a few issues with Fire and Blood, the book, however. The first is that it’s unfinished; Martin has only written the first of two planned volumes in the series, which covers from Aegon I though the next 157 years of the dynasty. (The rule of Aegon III, the last Targaryen ruler to have living dragons until Daenerys, would come along another 150 or so years later.) And as anyone who watched the end of Game of Thrones now knows, adapting an unfinished Martin series is a difficult prospect.
THE REAL ISSUE IS THAT ‘FIRE AND BLOOD’ IS BORING
But the bigger issue is that Fire and Blood is so boring. The book is written as an in-universe historical tome, allegedly written by Archmaester Gyldayn, and it’s styled after Edward Gibbon’s The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, which is a wonderful historical set (or so I’m told) but not exactly entertaining reading. It is also 700 pages long, making the experience of reading it similar to that of slogging through a college history textbook, except none of it is real.
This isn’t necessarily a deal-breaker for a television adaption. The events of Fire and Blood are, in theory, thrilling: Aegon’s dragon-fueled conquests, succession crises, a dragon versus dragon Targaryen civil war called “The Dance of Dragons.” But HBO will have to make some considerable changes in style and tone from the dry-as-dust book if it wants to make compelling television. There’s also the issue that the later years of the dynasty (which, again, Martin has yet to write) obviously butts up against the current series in the sort of unnecessary prequel style that already haunts the Star Wars and Harry Potter franchises.
There’s also the far longer time period, although that could be managed if HBO takes more of an anthology approach. A Fire and Blood show could, for example, adapt one monarch’s reign in one season and then jump ahead in time to the next. Such a strategy could also help the network avoid ballooning actor salaries that helped Thrones become one of the most expensive shows that ever aired.
All of this is still in the early stages. Deadline’s report only notes that a pilot may be nearing an order, which isn’t a guarantee of any sort. And even if a pilot is shot, there’s no promise that HBO will actually move forward with a full series. But with Martin attached to the pitch, an actual book to work off of, and the sheer amount of money involved in the Game of Thrones brand, it wouldn’t be at all surprising if Fire and Blood ends up on our TV screens in a few years.

Generation Z has taken over Tinder, and they care more about causes like climate change than they do about posting adventurous vacation shots, according to a “Year in Swipe” report Tinder released today.
Unlike their millennial counterparts, Tinder’s report says that their younger users — the majority of people on Tinder are now under age 25 — are more likely to mention a cause or mission they’re passionate about on their profile. When it comes to what they’re the most passionate about, climate change and the environment topped the list along with social justice and gun control.
“Millennials connect over adventure, while Gen Z bonds over changing the world,” Tinder said in its release. Millennials were three times as likely to talk about travel than causes on their profiles. Generation Z helped propel Greta Thunberg, the 16-year-old climate activist who refuses to fly because of the greenhouse gas emissions it would generate, one of Tinder’s 2019 trending political figures.
“GEN Z BONDS OVER CHANGING THE WORLD.”
Yes, Tinder also decided to rank its trending political figures (for the US). Alongside Thunberg was Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez (D-NY), who introduced a resolution on a Green New Deal earlier this year that become a sort of litmus test for progressive presidential candidates. The Green New Deal, which brings together a package of policies aimed at tackling both climate change and social justice, was also a trending topic on Tinder in 2019 along with Billie Eilish, the Fyre Festival, Game of Thrones, and “Old Town Road.”
Perplexed? You’re not alone. One of the most popular emoji on Tinder this year was the facepalm, which saw a 41 percent increase in usage. “Apparently, if there’s one thing younger generations bond over today, it’s a shared sense of Facepalming at what’s happening in the world,” Tinder wrote.
There are plenty of facepalm-worthy facts floating around, but one that might resonate with the climate change activists and romance-seekers on Tinder was also announced this week: greenhouse gas emissions are projected to hit a record high this year.
Apple’s new Mac Pro and Pro Display XDR were announced all the way back at WWDC 2019 in June, and now we know when you’ll be able to place an order for the high-end hardware: December 10th, according to an email that Apple has sent out to customers (as spotted by Marques Brownlee on Twitter.)

Apple had originally announced that the Mac Pro and Pro Display XDR would be available sometime “this fall”; a Bloomberg report back in November confirmed that Apple would still be shipping the devices in December, but today’s email is the first confirmation of an actual date. (Technically, December 10th does still meet Apple’s promised “fall” release window, given that winter doesn’t officially start until the 21st of the month).
Notably, Apple’s annoucement email just says that the Mac Pro and Pro Display XDR will be “available to order” on December 10th — given the fact that many users will likely be ordering custom configurations, shipping may take longer.
The entry-level Mac Pro is set to cost $5,999, which gets you 32GB of memory, an octa-core Intel Xeon CPU, Radeon Pro 580X graphics, and a 256GB SSD. The 32-inch Pro Display XDR, starts at $4,999, although you’ll almost definitely need to buy the (controversial) $999 stand, which isn’t included in that $4,999 price.
